Xpirit Belgium was founded in November 2018, but the initial idea of
starting a new consultancy company was already coined many months
before. My partner in crime Gill Cleeren was still working as an
employee when we made plans to join forces to build something new. For
many years I had already been running a one-man show as a freelance
Application Lifecycle Management consultant and was longing for a
collaboration to realize something bigger, together with a strong team
of people.

Our previous experiences in the consultancy business had given us a
clear understanding what we didn't want to do and which core values were
crucial to get started. Being both heavily involved as Microsoft Most
Valuable Professionals (MVPs) in the developer community, we came into
contact with many consultants from Xpirit in The Netherlands. It was
obvious that Xpirit shared the same core values when doing business with
customers, and more importantly, they had the same vision of how to grow
a culture of innovation, knowledge sharing, and collaboration. The most
important assets in every consultancy business are the people, eager to
learn and ready to rise above themselves.

It still took a while to officially launch our business in Belgium and
to define the rules of engagement. But once we started, we never looked
back and we're very happy to have chosen the path of extending the
Xpirit brand and the cooperation across the border. Being able to rely
on an existing business partner has proven its value.

Over the nearly two years that we have been in business now, we have
grown into a local team of seven consultants without having a specific
plan for growth. The people who joined in the beginning were all from
within our own network, people whom we could trust and who showed the
technical skills that we instantly needed for our customers. This
journey to add people to our team and to keep everyone happy has been
the biggest challenge, and we have learned a lot about the different
personalities in our team. Technical expertise is one important asset to
make a difference, but we noticed that it's even more important to have
the right mindset and to fit into the team as a team player. In the end,
we want to build a long-lasting relationship with everyone who joins
Xpirit Belgium.

The last couple of months have been quite different with the ongoing
Covid-19 situation and we miss the in-person events to keep up-to-date
with each other but we feel that we are ready to take the next step and
welcome extra people to our team. And so, for the first time, Xpirit
Belgium is officially hiring and we are looking for new talent!

Xpirit won the Microsoft Global DevOps Partner Award of the Year in 2018
and still employs the most Microsoft MVPs within one single company
worldwide, in addition to two Microsoft Regional Directors. A few months
ago, Xpirit also achieved the GitHub Verified status which enables our
customers to apply DevOps practices in all areas.

Do you want to become part of a team that is constantly learning,
challenging the status quo, sharing experiences, driving change and
having fun? We are looking for highly motivated people to strengthen our
team of Azure Cloud and DevOps consultants. Get into contact with us and
let's grab a coffee to discuss the next step in your career! Our
consultants in Belgium and The Netherlands are the best you can find in
the industry and they would love to have a conversation on how you can
start your journey to be part of the best of the best in the Microsoft
technology space. Are you ready to make the jump and move up to the next
level? Give us a call!
