# Protecting tomorrow: Infuse Innovation

It is only 1,5 years back when OpenAI launched ChatGPT to the public. November 2022 will be marked as an important milestone in history. For many people, ChatGPT was the first acquaintance with using a Large Language Model (LLM), and in this first version, it could only generate text, which still had a lot of flaws. It looks like it was ages ago because the pace of innovation in this area is mind-blowing. AI is everywhere; we see it popping up in consumer products like electric toothbrushes. Although the implementation of AI is still far from perfect in many cases, its widespread usage and adoption are phenomenal. Companies and customers are asking for AI solutions. Whether by using tools to assist professionals in becoming AI-assisted professionals or by building AI functionality into existing or new applications, we will soon all use AI.

The more AI we use, the more innovation we can infuse into our applications, and the higher the demand for security and protection will be. Every upside of technology also has a downside. So, protection against identity fraud, cyber attacks, DDOS attacks, and supply chain attacks is becoming increasingly important as well. And then, next to all this, we still have all the other innovations going on in cloud and software development.

In this magazine, we see many articles dealing with protection and innovation. Quite a few articles talk about different kinds of security and protection. Michael explains how we can get rid of client secrets in our OAuth flow, and Kristoff writes about how you can Mock your OpenID provider to make testing easier. Jesse talks about protecting the integrity of your git commits by signing them, and Bas tells his real-life story about how Azure helped to protect against a DDOS attack. And then we have Danny. He wrote about sustainable software engineering and how this can help to protect our environment.

Then, we move from protection to innovation. At the crossroads, there is responsible AI. Matthijs shares his ideas on using LLM in our context and how we, as developers, should be careful with the results of an LLM. Sander wrote a great article to help you write better prompts. Geert talks about AI and using connected agents to tie multiple smart AI agents together, and Olena takes it beyond text generation and writes about how AI can be used to generate art! Thijs and Randy share their experience on how their enthusiasm for AI-assisted development led to creating a Copilot bootcamp.

Finally, you can find some articles about the latest technologies and updates. Victor wrote an article that explains how to build SQL Merge functionality into EF Core with custom statements. Niels dives into the world of Blazor and how it can really help in building modern applications. And Thiago shares his insights on Azure Container Apps.

I believe this magazine is again a striking reflection of our current time and the challenges that lie ahead of us. It is hard to keep up with the rapid pace of innovation in our industry, and this magazine only scratches the surface of many of these topics. For your convenience, each article has a QR code with a link to a more deep dive course on the topic. In any case, with this pace, I cannot wait to see our magazine next year. Have a nice read!

Oh .. and BTW, Arjan and Jasper made it possible to search through our archive of XPRT Magazines and make it possible to get answers about all the tech we had the last 10 years! Of course with AI, as a ChatGPT Assistant, available as plugin! Enjoy!
