**Beacons create safe routes for Maersk's voyages through the cloud**

*Maersk is the world\'s largest container shipping company, with
end-to-end services spanning the entire supply chain. The company's
logistics web uses a robust infrastructure that makes use of a cloud
platform. Adequate protection against today's regular malware and virus
attacks is of crucial importance for Maersk's business continuity. To
steer a safe course in combining agile ways of working and cloud-based
development with compliance with Maersk's security and quality
standards, Maersk collaborated with Xpirit, and introduced the Unified
Delivery Model (UDM). The model uses beacons to signal teams as well as
stakeholders of the extent in which they are on course, compliant with
standards, and secure against any threats. The beacons even provide
functionality for automatic reconciliation, thus repairing IT components
from any malfunction. The beacons proved their value in December 2021
when a Log4j vulnerability was signaled in time and any affected
component and server could be returned to business as usual, within a
minimum of time.*

**Comprehensive cloud infrastructure**

Maersk's full-service portfolio goes well beyond container shipping, and
comprises the complete supply chain, from factory to warehouse and from
farm to refrigerator. A robust infrastructure is the backbone of the
company's intricate logistics web, with IT components that are being
developed by teams in different locations. The teams use a cloud-based
environment, which was introduced in 2018. Bruno Amaro, head of Cloud
Compliance for Maersk, describes the journey into the cloud: "Naturally,
compliance with our security and quality standards was, and is, of key
importance for our business continuity and quality of service. This
required extremely thorough analysis while we were designing, developing
and implementing the cloud infrastructure, which is why we involved
Xpirit's experienced consultants. They provided great help in getting
the infrastructure implemented, but their special value lies in their
thorough analysis. They constantly challenge you in your ideating
process and tell you when you're about to deviate from your mindset and
intended course. Their typically Dutch directness proved to be a great
help and by not leaving a stone unturned."

**Compliance with security and quality standards monitored by beacons**

Bruno continues: "Naturally, the approach of teams working in all
corners of the world working in an agile, DevOps-based manner required
constant and through monitoring. Not only in terms of compliance with
safety and security, but also operational efficiency. This is why we
introduced the Unified Delivery Model (UDM), a framework that allows
teams to be responsible for their own value-chain via a self-service
portal. A key component of the model consists of beacons that signal
teams of the extent to which they are on course, compliant with
standards, and secure against any threats. The beacons light up in green
to indicate that you're on the right course without any issues, while
they light up in red to indicate any type of risk or non-compliance. For
instance, when Microsoft releases a new security patch, the beacons
automatically turn red, alerting the teams that an action is required to
get back to compliance. Stakeholders also see the beacons, so in
addition to keeping the development teams on track, they serve as an
efficient communication channel."\
Erick Segaar, one of Xpirit's team of consultants who were involved in
the project for years: "One of the great qualities of beacons is that
they don't block anything, unlike many other compliance measures. They
signal possible issues in time and ahead of actual problems and notify
you when you need to adjust your approach. What's more, the beacons
offer a self-healing mechanism, thus reconciling and remedying issues
without any human interaction. While this feature in itself was not
super complex to implement, the challenge was to leave the
responsibility with the teams without limiting their autonomy."

Bruno adds on a light note: "While the beacons constantly alerted each
of our teams, I was caught off guard when I visited the Xpirit team in
their office in Hilversum. The day I arrived we did some great
team-building, went go-karting, lots of drinks and dinner in the
evening. However, that night in my hotel room I got so sick, I saw all
colors of the rainbow, and I believe I said yes to everything during the
meetings on the second day, not seeing any red beacon."

**Immediate and timely measures against log4j vulnerability\
**One remarkable result of using the beacons was our extremely effective
response to a log4j vulnerability that occurred in December 2021. Bruno:
"The beacons signaled us well in time of the risk that certain servers
were affected, and this allowed us to take the required measures well in
time, thus preventing any impact on our business. In short, a wonderful
confirmation of the security measures we took on our cloud journey, as
well as the valuable cooperation with Xpirit."
