Xpirit is not your standard company. We do things our own way, which is
sometimes different from what other companies do. It's not always easy
to explain our mission and values, because what you see on the surface
is not necessarily the same as what happens inside. In coming up with
ways to tell our story, we found a lot of similarities between Xpirit
and a beehive. Let us tell you our story as if we are a bee colony and
find out how well the analogy can convey our view on work and our
people.

## It is all about the colony

Xpirit is a group that consists of wonderful people that believe in the
adventure of running a people first company. They joined and started
their journey within Xpirit. Some of them joined 7 years ago, others
more recently, yet all hearing the same, unchanged story. We think our
people define who we are. There is no Xpirit without the people. Nor
would there be if we did not form the group as we have over the past
years. The future of Xpirit is determined by the wellbeing of the group,
which in turn is dependent on the participation and contributions of
every individual.

The same interdependency of a group to its members and vice versa can be
found in a bee colony. The colony is formed by all the bees that are
part of it. An individual bee cannot survive without the group, and the
colony cannot exist without the bees.

## Different roles and all equally valuable

Each bee plays a unique role in the colony by the work they do. There
are various types of bees in a colony, such as worker bees, drones, and
queens. Most of the bees are worker bees. These take on different tasks
during their lives, ranging from foraging for nectar and creating honey,
building the hive, taking care of the queen and young drones, and
nurturing the eggs and newly born bees. In turn, the drones make sure
the colony stays healthy and grows, and the queens run the beehive and
its colony by taking care of the bees and raising them. It is a
symbiotic ecosystem inside the colony, where each bee, regardless of
type or tasks, plays a crucial part and makes an essential contribution.
Even though there are different types of bees, every single bee is
equally important, even the queen. They all need each other to survive
and flourish.

You can see the same at Xpirit. Each person chooses the role they want
to play and performs tasks accordingly. Some choose to work more inside
of the beehive and are less visible to the outside world. They work in
teams or pairs for our customers, but also build inside of Xpirit. They
show the direction of Xpirit by sharing their experience and knowledge
and organizing social events and off-sites to grow as a group. They act
as a voice in internal initiatives and help shape the future and
direction of Xpirit.

Others find joy in being more public and share knowledge in meetups,
conferences and with management of our customers. These people are more
in the public eye, and therefore more visible to the outside world.
However, not everyone does presales, is a speaker or a Microsoft MVP,
nor is that expected of anyone. Not every bee goes outside foraging.
Some are building the honey rates, creating honey or ventilating the
hive to make a nice atmosphere and help the hive run smoothly. And
again, all people and roles are equally important.

## Hivemind

Bee colonies appear to act as a single organism, made up of all the
individual lives and actions of the bees. They seem to have a shared
mind, composed of all the unique minds and thoughts of individual bees.
The shared mind, also known as hivemind, is about the mission and
purpose of the colony. It implies a form of internal communication that
is both spoken and unspoken to keep everyone in sync and aware of what
is happening. It allows the colony to act in a purposeful manner,
instead of performing uncoherent individual actions.

Xpirit also has a shared mindset. Everyone knows the mission of learning
and growing together, and the values that help guide us. They have the
same vision of building high-quality software using the Microsoft
platform and helping customers achieve success by applying these ideas
and insights. Our people have a combined body of knowledge and
experience. Sharing that knowledge is in our genes. This way, everyone
can benefit from one another and tap into more knowledge than any single
person could ever manage to attain. Asking one person how modern
software development is done, will give you the same consistent answer.
It might be different, but is part of the same, bigger picture. Some are
software engineers writing code, while others consult with management on
processes and organizing teams to align with business requirements and
architecture. Still others maintain stable and robust solutions in the
cloud. Even though the answer might be specific to a certain phase or
aspect of software development, the puzzle pieces of the answers you
receive will fit together into a perfect picture.

## Busy bees all together

With all the energy floating around, we are a bunch of busy bees. There
are lots of individual actions that lead to many accomplishments. We
organize meetups, bootcamps, write a magazine, spend evenings together
in a leisurely fashion, brainstorm ideas, and make plans. We reflect on
how we are doing and reorganize accordingly, do activities related to
marketing and company or personal branding. Some of it is publicly
visible, and some internal. Everyone is encouraged to venture and
explore by themselves and do what they feel is good and beneficial for
the group of Xpirit. No rules, just guidance and the freedom to make
autonomous decisions: it keeps the energy flowing. And we have lots of
energy to keep us all going and inspiring each other.

## Interacting with our environment

Bees are well known for their contribution to the environment. They live
in a permanent symbiosis with their surroundings, collecting nectar to
survive and pollinating the flowers in the process. Young bees rarely
venture out of the hive. It is at a later stage that they are harvesting
nectar and discovering the landscape in search of new flowers and
sources of food and materials. That is how we also bring experience to
the outside world and share knowledge to cross-pollinate between
companies, organizations, and communities. In the process, we are
collecting newfound knowledge, ideas, and insights to share both
internally and with the rest of the world. Some choose to do this in a
more private setting with customers, others prefer presenting or
blogging about it, or by coaching and advising within Xpirit, our hive.

## More than meets the eye

Some aspects of a bee colony are plain to see, such as the harvesting
bees on the outside, going out into the world, all very exposed and
visible. But there is much more happening on the inside of the beehive.
Working at Xpirit does not mean that you must be a very senior or
experienced engineer, be a public speaker, or have a high rating on
StackOverflow. Xpirit exists because everyone plays a role that is
equally valuable, and many of those roles cannot be seen from the
outside. There is plenty of opportunity to grow. We all share the same
mindset, share our knowledge, and thrive together, because of the
balanced ecosystem that we form together. Some of this has to be
experienced in person. You are invited to come take a look at our
beehive, the Xpirit headquarters, in Hilversum. Come talk to us so we
can talk more about who we are and how we work. If you consider yourself
a bee without many flying hours or a specific role, don't worry. We
welcome everyone who wants to learn and grow. We want to help you
unleash your potential and "inner bee" by becoming part of our colony.
