# Introducing Xpirit DevOps services!

Xpirit is *the* authority on Microsoft consulting, ranging from DevOps
and Cloud to management consultancy and cloud-native software
development. However, our customers wanted more -- more help from a
great team of Microsoft experts in every part of the lifecycle, be it
advice, building or maintaining.

To satisfy this need, we started with a new label Xpirit DevOps services
which started on 1 January 2021. At Xpirit DevOps services, we believe
that the existing managed services industry is about to be changed
radically. Xpirit DevOps services is one of the companies that is
leading this change.

For example, instead of focusing on maximized SLA percentiles, we focus
on SLA percentiles thar are as low as we can afford. The lower the SLA,
the more room there is for the teams to experiment, fail-fast, and
innovate. This is in line with what the industry is accelerating
towards, as we move towards a lean organization by embracing cloud,
agile and DevOps. We believe that our managed services proposition is an
enabler for your organization, not a blocker. Hence the name, Xpirit
DevOps Services.

All the cloud experience from our consulting label allowed us to create
a product that enables our customers safely inside the cloud. This is
ideal when you are migrating, or when you want to restructure your cloud
usage. Our Azure landing zone provides a safe place to land your
workloads in the cloud. We offer a fully compliant and secure Azure in a
box solution, with CI/CD pipelines, four-eyes approval, cloud native
resources, monitoring options, etc. And it goes without saying that our
Xpirit DevOps services also provide support. We have multiple,
specialized solutions ranging from Government, Education, Data&AI and
Business applications.

In short, we want your DevOps teams to have full control by embracing
DevOps, cloud and SRE, together with all the experience from our
customers that allow us to build suitable products. We are very happy to
have already onboarded a number of customers and we are off to a good
start. We would love to have a talk with you if this article has peeked
your interest. Let us know!

Suraj & Marc
