# Anchor

At Xpirit, we believe that developing applications for the cloud is a
new expertise that requires more than just a thorough understanding of
cloud capabilities. You also need a specific way of working and a
different mindset. It is essential to adopt the business perspective to
see how organizations can achieve their goals by using the cloud as an
enabler and an essential part of building software.

# Looking at IT from a business perspective

Modern high-performing organizations make effective use of IT as part of
doing and running their business. The created supporting software
solutions require a fast time-to-market to be relevant for customers,
companies and employees alike. Quick feedback from end-users and
production systems enables an adaptive approach to evolve ideas and
solutions to stay relevant. Looking at software solutions from the
business perspective shows a couple of traits that define modern,
competitive solutions:

-   **Be cost efficient**

A solution should have mostly operational costs and no significant
capital expenditures, such as initial investment in hardware. The
resulting operating model has low upfront investments and scales the
costs less than proportional to the solution\'s use, growth, and
success.

-   **Differentiate on business essentials**

You want to focus on the differentiating parts of the solutions. Common
functionality and cross-cutting concerns should be ready-to-use building
blocks. The custom-built parts should be essential to business to
justify development.

-   **Effective operations and maintenance**

Automation makes software solutions effective in operation and easy to
maintain. Achieving full automation eliminates any manual steps. It
reduces the risk of human errors and speeds up development processes by
avoiding the availability of people needed to perform actions.

-   **Enable autonomous teams**

Teams combining business and IT want to be in control of the solutions
they create and take full responsibility for building and running it.
These decisions and actions also relate to infrastructure, hosting,
deploying and releasing software. Self-service provisioning gives teams
the ability to create all aspects and parts of the software solution
on-demand at any time.

-   **Secure and compliant**

Any solution must be secure and compliant by default. A solution
architecture is designed with that in mind. The build and release
process uses quality gates to automate security and compliance checks on
every change of the solution.

-   **Provide business agility**

Becoming agile means drastically reducing the time from idea to
production and being able to adapt as fast as possible to opportunities
and changing circumstances. Again, automation helps to maintain a
high-quality state of the system, allowing a release of functionality at
any given moment.

# Cloud-native applications as the new norm

Cloud-native applications are a perfect fit for software solutions in
modern organizations. They have the mentioned characteristics by making
optimal use of cloud capabilities. A cloud-native application deeply
integrates with managed platform services in the cloud. It leverages
these as building blocks for common functionality to focus on the
differentiating, custom-built parts.

Additionally, teams can create automated pipelines for building and
releasing cloud-native applications utilizing the high degree of
automation in the cloud. Based on the cloud's pay-as-you-use model it
becomes possible to take costs into consideration when architecting a
cloud-native solution. The cloud also allows view the costs during
operation, so teams can be in control of how much is spent on running
and see the effects of scaling the applications.

The cloud allows on-demand provisioning of resources, a team can use
this to automate the creation of environments. These environments can
range from long lived in production to short lived during testing and
even for training purposes. The cloud offers monitoring facilities to
observe the application during operation and react to any incidents.

# Cocreating business solutions 

Creating business solutions using cloud-native applications should be a
joint effort between business stakeholders, domain experts, the cloud
engineers and developers. The people with technical roles in the team
should acquire the necessary insights into the domain. A thorough
understanding of the business and domain logic is essential to build a
successful application. The business stakeholders and domain experts
need to transfer that knowledge by working inside the same team.

Cloud-native applications allows everyone in the team to focus on those
differentiating, often complex parts of a solution, as the less relevant
parts take less time to create. Also, as the entire team gathers more
knowledge, it can quickly iterate to include new features, refactor for
maintainability, improve performance and stability and fix any issues.

# Agile practices with DevOps and SRE

Given how a team can utilize the capabilities of the cloud to create
cloud-native applications, it can adopt new practices and methodologies
in their way of working. The applications align well with teams that
practice DevOps, Site Reliability Engineering (SRE) and other agile
practices, such as Scrum. The applications facilitate a blurring of the
line between development and operations. The teams can both create and
operate the applications in full control and autonomy. SRE becomes a
matter of using the cloud for global availability and replication,
self-healing capabilities and applying resiliency patterns.

## Identity and Access Management (IAM)

Dealing with security, accounts and social identities in cloud solutions
can be challenging. It is a complex and specific set of features that
involves practically every corner of your application landscape.
Strangely enough, IAM is not part of an application but is required
nevertheless to offer authentication and authorization functionality. It
is a cross-cutting concern and essential to enable creating secure
cloud-native solutions easily. Yet, this is often overlooked when
starting a transition to the cloud.

A modern organization needs a proper cloud identity platform with IAM
facilities to provide secure access to its applications and data. It
will allow Single Sign-on (SSO) to web applications for its employees,
customers and other users, who no longer need multiple accounts to
login. Also, a cloud identity platform gives control, insights and
monitoring capabilities for identity lifecycle management.

## Application modernization

Usually, companies already have an existing landscape of applications,
where not all applications meet current business requirements or
standards for software development. Such applications can be modernized
to meet your ambition as a company. Application modernization means more
than just lift-and-shift cloud migration. It is an ideal moment to
choose an appropriate strategy for each application to be refactored,
rehosted or rebuild on a new platform.

Our approach to determine the best strategy for modernization includes
the following steps:

1.  Identify current requirements, challenges and goals

2.  Perform functional and technical decomposition of the current
    application(s)

3.  Choose migration strategy per functional area and component

4.  Define alignment of the new solution in future state architecture
    and application landscape

5.  Design and develop new application parts as a cloud-native solution

# Practice what you preach

From the very start Xpirit has been providing help to companies, teams
and people who want to create modern solutions based on the Microsoft
platform and development tooling with agile practices. The focus was
mainly on consultancy and coaching around the software development
process and using cloud technology, and only partly on building and
implementing the solutions we advise on.

Early 2021 we decided that we should start offering additional services
to our customers and help design and create cloud-native solutions and
supporting capabilities. These services cover four areas:

1.  **Develop mission-critical applications:** greenfield development of
    cloud-native solutions

2.  **Application modernization:** migration of existing applications to
    become cloud-native

3.  **Establish cloud identity platform**

4.  **Training and workshops to learn practices, patterns and skills for
    cloud-native development**

Our services are geared towards helping customers solve business
problems using modern, high-quality software designed and built using
cloud-native technology. Our propositions are about people: skilled
DevOps engineers that are experts in Microsoft Azure cloud technology,
the .NET development platform and matching front-end technology. They
can act as a team to build the solutions. Alternatively, they can
augment existing teams in a leading role to provide cloud, DevOps and
SRE knowledge to build the solution and train the team members while
doing so. As a multi-disciplinary team, they create the new modernized,
future-proof cloud-native solution from scratch or by modernizing
existing ones. On top of this, we can help deliver a cloud identity
platform using our experience and expertise to complement the creation
of secure cloud-native solutions.

# Let's fly to the cloud

Xpirit is venturing into the cloud even more by providing services to
design and create your business solutions with cloud technology. We
would love to make you part of that flight into the cloud. Whether you
are a customer or a new team member, we are passionate about building
the best cloud-native solutions together with you. Reach out and join us
for a journey into the future. You can contact us at
<athissen@xpirit.com> or <lduys@xpirit.com>.
