**Able, Willing, and Ready to Change**

Working with Today's Trends. That's How We Roll at Xpirit!

We get most of our inspiration from the energy and passion of the people
in our company, from creating new things together. It's all about the
culture we have nurtured and fostered over the years. We presented a
vision two-and-a-half years ago: we were going to do things completely
differently. Our number-one priority is our employees: People First!
There are few places as inspiring and dynamic as Xpirit. Our workforce
isn't straitjacketed by job descriptions or a top-down hierarchy. We all
have our own set of responsibilities, and we're really in this together.
We take team spirit to a whole new level!\
\
One of our guiding principles is to remain focused on working with
communities and sharing knowledge without expecting anything in return.
That's why we are proud to present this fourth issue of *Xpirit
Magazine*, which is about just that!

**"Help us transition to the cloud,"** is a frequently heard request
from our clients. The first step in this process tends to be making sure
a clearly mapped-out procedure is in place. Some companies try to take
the easy way out and go with the lift-and-shift approach, where in-house
apps are replicated in the cloud without being redesigned (i.e., a
bare-bones IaaS model). But they end up running into all kinds of
architectural issues, while having little ability to make the required
adjustments. This is where the cloud can become something of a poisoned
chalice, doing more harm than good. That's why we always advise clients
to start at the base and review the fundamental architecture. They need
to think carefully about any re-architecting required and the
integration of IT Operations. DevOps is fundamental to this process. You
need to make sure your test automation and release management are in
order before migrating to the cloud. As part of ALM, DevOps is the
bedrock of a successful cloud migration -- and it's crucial to
maintaining a solid infrastructure going forward, with all the various
technical steps involved.

**Using Azure to smoothly transform IT Operations into Self-Service**

As the ultimate self-service platform, Azure is able to accelerate
DevOps. DevOps involves bringing together all the various IT
disciplines, including development and IT operations. In order to
accelerate the development and delivery of new solutions, you need a
faster IT operations environment -- preferably using a self-service
model which allows developers and IT operations, working together, to
provision the systems they require at that particular time. The bonus is
that it's set up as a pay-as-you-go/pay-per-use system, giving you as
much computing power as you need.

**Is a full Cloud Migration really the smart thing to do?**

Is it really more secure to store your data in the cloud than on a
server somewhere? Public opinion on this is shifting from 'the cloud is
scary' to 'the cloud is the default.' Increasingly, people feel there's
no point having your own data center -- after all, how can you guarantee
the level of security public data centers are able to offer? It's a
fascinating mind shift that's taking place. Cloud computing is no longer
just something businesses will opt for on technical grounds: it's very
much on people's radars. The cloud is growing in popularity among many
home users. If these individuals feel it is safe, this will make them
more accepting of cloud-based technology being used by banks, insurance
providers and other service providers. Consequently, we are seeing a
shift towards cloud solutions across the board.\
\
Whether businesses will permanently shut down their data centers depends
on the type of company and type of business involved. If the data is of
a sensitive nature, there will probably always be room for a hybrid
cloud system, where the data is divided between on-premise and
cloud-hosted systems.

**Thinking in terms of Disruptive Solutions**

There are a number of businesses that regard IT as their main business
driver. Financial service providers are essentially operating IT
companies -- as are banks, insurers, and utilities companies. These
companies need to find new revenue models in the digital sphere, which
means that the lines between their business operations and the IT
backend are becoming increasingly blurred.\
\
Large enterprises need to be aware that competition can come from
unexpected sources.\
Start-ups and small spin-offs can land major accounts by luring them in
with appealing propositions. Enterprises need to ask themselves: 'Are we
flexible and adaptive enough to embrace this and focus on sharpening our
competitive edge?' You no longer need to make investments to compete
with major corporations: the combination of a sharp mind and an
ingenious idea has the power to really make an impact. Many of today's
established enterprises lack the kind of speed required to achieve
change. Businesses need to start thinking more in terms of disruptive
solutions.

IT companies need to learn to take a backseat. Many of them seem to
think they know better than you do how your business should be run --
but it's important to really work with the client and take a
comprehensive approach. Take our client Van Lanschot, for example, a
Dutch bank dating all the way back to 1737. Aware that they were losing
out to their twenty-first-century counterparts, they decided they had no
choice but to reinvent themselves as an omni-channel bank. This
transformation incorporates IT, marketing, and business elements. We
mapped out and managed the entire process for Van Lanschot -- a process
that requires a completely different type of IT consultant than 20 years
ago.

**The Consultants of the future: Trusted Advisors at the Board Level**

Can you brainstorm with clients at a high level? Are we the trusted
advisors that board members need? How can we organize your IT operations
down to the coding level? A modern-day software craftsman needs to be
able to deliver a variety of knowhow, skills and techniques.\
\
In addition to being a technical whiz, you need to be a strong
communicator with a genuine vision. As part of our job assessment
process, we test candidates to see if they dare to get out of their
comfort zones. Being geared toward personal growth is key in this
regard: allow yourself to be challenged and learn new things. Be
innovative and persistent, and take on projects outside of your
wheelhouse. Investing in expanding your skillset is crucial in this
context -- but to be successful, you also need to have the right
mindset. "Rather than getting hung up on what you might lose, you should
see change as an opportunity to try something new."

Innovation is about trying out new things without rushing back to your
comfort zone when the going gets tough. It requires persistence -- and
that's where you'll often find that people are stuck in their ways.

"The half-life of your technical expertise is only going to shrink." The
knowhow you possess now will be largely obsolete just a few years from
now. You need to remain aware that, while you may be able to call
yourself a specialist today, a couple of years down the line you'll need
to be attuned to, and understand, the trends of that moment. You need to
embrace that constant state of flux, which is why we make a point of
investing so much in knowledge development. It's vital that our
consultants keep learning all about the latest and greatest new things,
since we know that in two years' time what counts as state-of-the-art
now will be old news."\
\
This magazine was developed with this in mind. It aims to keep you
up-to-date on some of the most exciting developments happening in IT
right now. Be sure to pass it on!

Marcel de Vries, Xpirit CEO, and Pascal Greuter, Xpirit Managing
Director
