# MOVING THE BUSINESS NEEDLE

Nowadays, every business is a technology business, no matter what
product or service it provides. In the current day and age, no company
can make, deliver, or market its product efficiently without
technology. Whether it is banks, insurance companies, logistics
companies, or retailers, technology is critical to their success. Many
companies embrace this fact. They understand when they adopt new
technology and implement it successfully, they gain a stronger foothold
on the market and stay relevant. Companies that wait for a second or
third wave stay at the back of the pack and will have a very hard time
becoming a leader in their market or even staying afloat in markets with
strong competition.

To be a technology company, you need to act and behave like a technology
company. At Xpirit, we look at your business as a collection of
capabilities that are required to allow you to run, create and deliver
your products and services. We distinguish digital capabilities and
leadership capabilities, which are both required to digitally succeed as
a business. A digital capability we regard as a combination of people,
processes, and technology to deliver value to internal and external
customers. The leadership capability is about merging the skills and
perspectives of your business and IT leaders with the goal to help them
drive change together. For that, they need to have a digital vision,
engage the organization at scale, and govern the change.

We call this combined set of capabilities and behaviors a company should
have an *Engineering Culture*. Everything we do as Xpirit adds to this
vision. This *Engineering Culture* can be seen from many different
perspectives that we categorize into a number of distinct pillars that
together will help you become successful and can be used to drive
change.

One of the pillars of this *Engineering Culture* is *Moving the business
needle*. For us, moving the business needle is all about achieving
greater success for your company by helping you get the most value out
of technology. Our way of working should have enough of an effect so
that people notice a change that adds value to the business. Making a
noticeable impact. Moving your business needle to become a truly digital
enterprise.

*Digital is not a thing, but is simply a word that describes our world
today.*

## Start with *why?*' (And *for whom?*)

A company can only exist by the grace of its relevance. To stay
relevant, you will need to keep reinventing yourself. This applies to
people as well as companies. We probable all know stories of companies
that have been felled, and the stories of those that have proven able to
reinvent themselves. It's clear that, without relevance, it takes only
time to become obsolete and for companies to eventually go out of
business.

To be able to stay relevant, you must start by asking yourself the
question: what is our *why*? Why are we in business? And, more
important, *for whom*? Who are our customers? You'll need to find out
who and what decides whether you're still relevant. Because let's face
it, it's not you who has the say in that. You'll find out that your
customers aren't part of a single group. In fact, your customers will be
both internal parts of your organization, customers you directly serve
and customers you indirectly serve, in the form of your customers'
customers. You're not in business for a single of those groups and have
the others merely follow. To be perceived as relevant, it is all about
delivering continuous value to those that you serve, let's call them
*stakeholders*. And to impact them, things don't stop at the gates of
departments or even your company. You'll need to think in delivering
value end-to-end to truly impact your customers.

## Organize around value streams continuously delivering value

That is where value streams come into play. A value stream is focused on
how value is delivered to *stakeholders* and is not about *business
processes* or *how* *things are done*. Value streams use an outside-in
view, from the perspective of the customer rather than an internal value
chain or process perspective. Using this outside-in view, you're
challenged to think as the stakeholder affected. A value stream can be
cross mapped to enable business capabilities that describe what an
organization must do to deliver value to that stakeholder.

*"You build it, you run it!"*

Within a value stream, multiple disciplines work together creating a
continuous flow of value. Instead of working in silos, value streams
contain cross-functional teams that can work autonomously. They have
adopted the *'You build it, you run it'* approach, taking responsibility
and control over development ***and*** operations. This shortens the
feedback loop, eliminates barriers, and lessens delays, ultimately
allowing faster learning, higher quality, increased productivity, and
shorter time-to-market.

## Know where you differentiate, versus what is (or should be) a commodity

After knowing your why and for whom you are in business, it is also
important to understand where you differentiate. Because to bring the
most value, you need to know where to focus your efforts. Things where
you don't or simply could not differentiate should be commoditized,
meaning you adhere to industry standards in processes and technologies.
You must make choices and focus your precious efforts and resources, as
it's not worth -- nor feasible - spending those towards things that
deliver a relatively low value. Having this focus is crucial for
success, especially in times like these where talent is scarce,
technologies change with the speed of light and you are in a constant
race with your competition, be it known or unknown.

Don't make the mistake of thinking your organization is (too) special,
be honest to yourself here. Sure, you will have processes that are in
some shape or form unique to your business. But, is that because they
are truly differentiating you, or are they because they've grown that
way historically and you are holding on to them *believing* they
differentiate you? Remember, most in fact are -- or should be --
commodity. Don't try and reinvent what everybody else is doing, but
instead adopt standards whether it be processes, technologies, or
software. This leaves a way to focus your precious money, energy, and
time on what really differentiates you and can therefore deliver the
highest value and make the biggest impact.

## Embrace a culture of change... or brace for impact!

Understand that the heart of becoming a digital enterprise is not just
technology, but human capacity. And with becoming a digital enterprise,
therefore, comes cultural change. Instead of going about change in a
project-by-project manner, create a culture of change. Continuous
investments toward creating a culture of change will allow your
organization to embrace it, make change happen, and sustain change.

When changing, it will be natural for there to be criticism and
resistance. Communication is key here, communicate clearly, early, and
often. Share your vision and the reasons for change. Listen to feedback
and create a feedback loop. Bring people on board and develop a team
mindset with people representing the whole value chain. This will form a
powerful coalition and be the guiding team. These aspects serve as
strong governance when embracing a culture of change.

*It does not only help to have a vision and a clear plan with
objectives, it is imperative for success.*

## Develop a vision and a plan, but mind the concrete

At this point, you will have realized that becoming a successful digital
enterprise does not begin with technology, nor that it stops at
technology; rather, it's all about having the right strategy and
mindset. Yes, technology is an essential tool in achieving your desired
goals, but it's only a tool.

Where do you ultimately want to be, what's the dot on your horizon? The
answer to that question is your definition of success. And remember,
success is relative. To achieve success, set realistic goals on the
journey towards that definition that fit your organizations'
capabilities. Nothing is more demotivating than working endlessly
towards unrealistic goals. That doesn't mean you should neglect the
bigger picture and your ultimate goal. Or, as we like to call it, your
BHAG: Big Hairy Audacious Goal. But define steps feasible steps towards
that goal. Writing down how you plan to move the business needle helps
with focus and commitment. It becomes your roadmap, and you will be able
to tangibly measure your progress. And don't set your goal concrete,
this allows you to sharpen your goal along the way.

## Collectively look at the same gauges and needles 

To make a big impact towards your goals, you need to have everyone
involved in the organization collectively look at the same gauges and
move the same needles. This is something you will only achieve based on
a mutual understanding of what is important (your gauges) and how it is
measured (your needles). Having your gauges and needles in place allows
you to measure the impact of changes and track the results over time. It
enables you to employ statistical techniques to discover what aspect of
your efforts is having the greatest impact. With this, you can take
learnings and steer your plan to focus efforts on what delivers the most
value. It creates a feedback loop that allows continuous improvement and
that increases effectiveness.

## Start small, but be strategic and intentional

You might have heard the phrase "It's not about the destination, but the
journey". When you embark on becoming a digital enterprise, you'll for
sure not know the exact end goal and how to get there, be it simply
because you can't predict everything. If you think you do, look at some
recent disruptive events, like Covid, and think again. Hell, it might
even be all journey and there might not be a 'final' destination, and
that's fine. So, whenever you start the journey, not knowing when or how
you'll reach your destination, make the journey itself worthwhile. Start
small, and work in steps towards overseeable goals. Create quick wins
and be sure to celebrate and share achievements. Experiment and allow
yourself failures, or as we like to call them: opportunities to learn.

*If it hurts, do it more often.*

## Leadership: Put your money where your mouth is

As a leader, show your commitment to achieving results, by being part of
it, being seen, and getting your hands dirty. Don't just talk the talk,
walk the walk. Put trust in the people around you and give them the
power and mandate to make choices they think are best in line with their
shared goals and ambition. Empower people to take ownership and reward
those who go above and beyond. Nurture a culture that allows people to
fail often and fail fast, without shame or punishment, in order to learn
and improve.

Share a clear vision and communicate early, clear, and often. Be an
approachable leader for your team and always keep your eyes and ears
open, absorbing feedback from the organization and eliminating barriers
that impede transformation. Address concerns and show that you are there
to make difficult choices in the process when plans require adjustment.
Don't stick to plans blindly and don't fall for the *sunk cost fallacy*,
a human tendency to follow through on an endeavor just because of your
investment in time, effort and/or money into it, whether or not it will
outweigh the future benefits.

## Build on the change and make it stick

Making all that change stick is not something that happens overnight, it
takes thoughtful planning and a true shift in mentality. To make change
stick, is to create a culture of change instead of handling change in a
project-to-project manner. Only a culture of change will allow your
organization to make change happen and truly sustain it. If you mind the
beforementioned organizational and leadership behaviors, you are sure to
be in the right direction.

*Remember, moving the needle can be infectious.*

When you have the right foundation set and you are progressing well in
your journey of transformation, moving the needle in a business
environment can be infectious, in a positive way. As a team and in
numbers, working towards a common realistic goal, greater and larger
accomplishments are possible and skills like leadership and priority
management are subconsciously born. Make that mindset a part of company
culture and growth and success are likely to become commonplace.
