In 2011, Marc Andreessen claimed in the Wall Street Journal that
"**Software is eating the world**", predicting that the rise of software
would digitally transform every industry and every sector of the world
as we know it. Ten years later, there is nothing more to say but: he was
right. Software has completely transformed our lives, and with that,
every company, and every organization on the planet. It has
fundamentally changed the entertainment industry with Netflix and
Spotify. It has transformed travel and hospitality with AirBnB and
Booking. It has transformed our cities with scooters, public
transportation, and parking, that you can book with your phone in
seconds. Every company is becoming a software company because the
business models transform from selling products to creating experiences.

This means, that companies must change. Not only their business model --
but also the way they work, the way they are organized, and the way they
leverage IT resources. This transformation has many names. If we talk
about the change of the business model, we talk about **digital
transformation**. If we talk about the way of working, we talk about
**DevOps transformations**. And, if we talk about transformation of IT,
we talk about **Cloud transformation**. But they are all part of the
same story. You can only succeed, when you master all three of them. The
hard part is not digital, DevOps, or Cloud -- the hard part is the
transformation.

# Common pitfalls -- Why transformations fail {#common-pitfalls-why-transformations-fail .unnumbered}

Many transformations fail -- and it takes many companies more than one
attempt to get it right. But in most failed attempts we can see the same
patterns. If you want to succeed in your digital transformation, make
sure to avoid these five common pitfalls:

## Assuming your company or industry is special

Many customers that I meet believe that they are special, but they are
not. And I'm sorry to say, it's probable that neither is your company or
industry. At least, not when it comes to digital transformation. Could
your product kill people if it has a defect? So could cars, airplanes,
trucks, medical devices, and so on. And the same is true for all of the
parts that are produced for these products. They are nothing special. Do
you have to you comply with certain standards? Do you create military
products? Are you publicly traded? Do you work for governments? Whatever
you think makes your company special, chances are there are many
companies that face the same challenges that you do. The same rules
apply to them as to you when it comes to your digital transformation.

If you look at the studies for DevOps transformations, you'll find they
apply to all companies: from small start-ups to big enterprises and from
cutting-edge internet companies to highly regulated industries, such as
finance, healthcare, and government.[^1]

And this is actually a good thing. This means a lot of the problems
you're probably facing during your own transformation have already been
solved by others. You can learn from their failures and don't have to
experience them yourself.

## Having no sense of urgency

The biggest blocker to change is complacency. If people in your business
are complacent, they will tend to resist change and keep on doing
*business as usual*.

You must establish a true sense of urgency for people to address
critical things now. Urgency in this case does not mean pressure from
management that creates anxiety. True urgency should drive people to
change with a deep determination to win -- not with anxiety about
losing.[^2]

Without a sense of true urgency, people will resist change and are more
likely to keep their old behaviors. Note that a sense of urgency might
arise for completely different reasons at distinct levels of your
organization. Management might feel pressure from the market and the
lack of agility to react with frequent releases. Engineers might feel
the pressure of technical debt and the problem of attracting and
retaining talent because of old processes and tools. It is important to
align these stories to a common root cause using a clear vision. If you
manage to align the different senses of urgency into a single force that
drives in the same direction, you can ensure that the different forces
will not neutralize themselves.

## Having no clear vision

It is easy to replace tools, processes, and roles, but it is hard to
change behavior, culture, and stories. Without a clear vision, the
transformation will not yield the desired results.

If I hear customers say *we are not Microsoft or Google* or *we are not
a cutting-edge internet company*, it tells me they are missing a clear
vision. If your vision clearly states you want to become the digital
leader in your industry or change from a product company to a service
company, people will not dare to say things that contradict it.

A good vision to drive change is a clear and compelling statement of
where all your transformation leads.[^3]

I believe it is worth noting that transformations are not always driven
by upper management. I know many companies where the transformation is
driven by individual departments or even teams. Nevertheless, the same
rules apply -- you need a clear vision for the members in your team or
department and to establish a sense of urgency to ensure the
transformation is successful.

## Let obstacles block your progress

When you start a transformation, many obstacles will block your
transformation. Good examples that I often experience are certain
regulations in certain industries. Many regulations, such as ISO26262 or
GxP, propose the **V-Model** for software engineering. The V-Model is
based upon the **waterfall model**, so it contradicts basically
everything we have learned in many years of research. If you insist on
keeping the waterfall model, your transformation will most likely fail,
due to your internal interpretations of the regulations. If you have a
closer look at them, you'll realize they just insist on best practices.
If your practices are superior to the recommended ones, you can justify
that and still pass an audit.

Most obstacles you'll encounter are caused by your organization, for
example, your organizational structure, tight job categories, processes,
or trench warfare between the working council and management. Don't
permit these obstacles to block your transformation.

## Not getting help

Consultants have a bad reputation in many companies, mostly because of
bad experiences.

Often their appearance is associated with layoffs and other tough
decisions. But if you want to learn a new sport, you don't just buy the
equipment and watch some videos on YouTube. You join a club that
provides a professional trainer or find yourself a coach that will guide
you. Sports are not just about knowledge and tools -- they are about
building skills. And without an experienced coach, it is hard or
impossible to succeed in certain sports.

The same is true for building new skills and capabilities in your
business. There is no shame in getting help from someone more
experienced who can guide you through the change. The odds are high that
help will be cheap based on what you save in time and effort, never mind
the costs of failure.

# How to succeed with your digital transformation {#how-to-succeed-with-your-digital-transformation .unnumbered}

## Start with WHY {#start-with-why .unnumbered}

For a transformation to succeed, you need a clear vision and a sense of
urgency. The vision should be precise, compelling, short, and should
inspire people to follow it. To communicate the vision, you can follow
the Golden Circle[^4] and communicate from the inside to the outside
(see Figure 1).

![A picture containing text, iPod Description automatically
generated](./media/image1.png)


Figure 1: Communicating a vision should start with WHY?

Let us see the layers of the circle in more detail:

-   **WHY?**: The reason why your company will undertake the
    transformation. This gives it a purpose and establishes a sense of
    urgency. Why should anyone care?

-   **HOW?**: How are you going to succeed in the transformation
    process?

-   **WHAT?**: The actual thing that you want to transform. What are you
    doing or making?

## A purpose-driven mission  {#a-purpose-driven-mission .unnumbered}

Don't underestimate the power of vision! If you are a manufacturer of
combustion engine cars, transformation to electrical cars will not come
easy. There will be resistance. People will be afraid to lose the power
of their jobs.

To succeed, you need a clear vision and to communicate the *WHY*? --
like the Volkswagen Group in its *goTOzero* mission statement in 2019,
which concentrated on four main fields of action: climate change,
resources, air quality, and environmental compliance. By 2050, the
entire **Volkswagen Group** wants to become balance sheet CO2-neutral.
By 2025, the company plans to reduce the carbon footprint of its fleet
by 30 percent over its entire life cycle compared to 2015[^5]. This
perfectly explains the WHY?, establishes urgency, and fits into their
overall updated vision *to make this world a mobile, sustainable place
with access to all the citizens*. Equally, **Mercedes-Benz** stated in
their *Ambition 2039* statement from 2019 that they aim to have a
carbon-neutral car fleet and production over the next 20 years.[^6]

And it is the same when you transform a product company into a software
or services company. Even if you only transform from a waterfall
organization to a DevOps organization, people will be afraid of the
change and there will be resistance if you cannot paint a picture of a
desirable future and explain *why* you have to undertake the
transformation.

## Establish an engineering culture {#establish-an-engineering-culture .unnumbered}

Having a purpose-driven vision will help you to establish an
**engineering culture** during your transformation: an inclusive and
secure organizational culture that fosters talent and is driven by
sharing and equality. My colleagues wrote about this in XPRT Magazine
#12.[^7]

This is a culture where people feel safe to speak up when they feel
something is wrong, a culture where people feel safe to experiment and
be creative without fear, and a culture where everyone feels welcome and
safe -- independent of heritage, gender, or religion.

The culture of an organization is a set of shared assumptions that
guides behaviors within the organization[^8]. That's why it is hard to
change it. Creating PowerPoint slides with values and mission statements
might affect the culture but maybe not in the way management intends to.

As an engineer, you might ask yourself why the organization's culture
matters to you. Isn't that a task for management? However, the culture
is the result of the assumptions and the behaviors of every single
person in the system -- and that means every single person can change
it. As an engineer, you should be aware of your culture and you should
speak up if you see that something is wrong. Start doing the right
things and telling the right stories.

Culture is best ingrained into corporate behavior using little quotes
and principles that have a deeper meaning. They are easy to remember and
encourage people to do the right things. Here are some examples you will
often hear in companies with great engineering cultures:

-   *Ask forgiveness, not permission*: Encourage people to do the right
    thing, even if it is against current rules or processes.

-   *You build it, you run it*: Establish end-to-end responsibility and
    ownership for the things built.

-   *Fail early, fail fast, fail often (or fail fast, roll forward)*:
    Try to fail early and fast instead of making everything 100%
    bullet-proof.

-   *Embrace failure*: Encourage people to experiment and take risks and
    ensure blameless learnings from failure. *Take responsibility and
    don't blame others*.

-   *Collaborate, don't compete* or *work together not against*: Foster
    collaboration -- across organizational boundaries and also with
    customers and partners.

-   *Go fix*: Encourage people to take ownership and fix things instead
    of just complaining, but you have to ensure that innovation is not
    suppressed. Make sure people are also empowered to really fix the
    things they complain about.

-   *Treat servers like cattle, not like pets*: Encourage people to
    *automate everything*.

-   *If it hurts, do it more often*: Motivate people to practice things
    that are hard to build up the skills to accomplish. This phrase is
    often used in relation to releasing or testing applications.

These are just a few examples. More stories and sayings will arise when
you transform your culture and become a digital company.

A great engineering culture is not just the responsibility of
management. They have to let it happen and provide the vision but the
best culture is then created by the people themselves during the
transformation.

## Data-driven transformation {#data-driven-transformation .unnumbered}

If you want your transformation to succeed, it is critical to measure
the right metrics and to prove the transformation really yields better
results than the old system. Every metric or Key Performance Indicator
(KPI) you measure will have an impact on the behavior. That's why it is
important to measure metrics that matter[^9] that allow you to optimize
the right things first and to achieve small wins that will help you keep
everyone motivated to continue with the transformation. Measuring the
right data should always be the start for a transformation.

Optimizing something that is not a constraint is a waste of resources
and can even have a negative impact. **Objectives and Key Results**
(**OKR**)[^10] is a flexible framework to define and track objectives
and their outcomes. It is used by many digital companies, among them
Google, Microsoft, Twitter, and Uber.OKR helps organizations to achieve
a high alignment on strategic goals while keeping a maximum level of
autonomy for teams and individuals. That's why it is a good framework
for supporting your digital transformation.

A data- and AI-driven transformation is not a big-bang project that can
be planned for a fixed finish date. Change is a long process -- so your
digital transformation is rather a way than a goal. Led by the digital
vision -- the WHY -- the transformation can be separated into 3 phases
(see Figure 2):

![](./media/image2.png)


Figure 2: Phases of a data-driven digital transformation

-   **Digital Strategy**: Start by defining a Cloud, AI, and DevOps
    strategy. Gather company and market benchmarks.

-   **People, Process & Culture**: Build your first cross-functional
    teams around customer needs. Enable them to deliver value end-2-end
    and adjust the accompanying processes.

-   **Scale and optimize**: Create more teams around customer journeys
    and make sure to measure if the transformation is successful and
    yields the expected results.

Adoption and change management are an important pillar that accompany
the entire change process.

# Summary {#summary .unnumbered}

> \"Change is hard because people overestimate the value of what they
> have and underestimate the value of what they may gain by giving that
> up.\"\
> --- James Belasco and Ralph Stayer

Change is always hard and that is the reason why many enterprise
transformation fail -- not only the digital transormation. But there are
some typical pitfalls that can be avoided. If you think that one of
these pitfalls apply to your company -- hit refresh and start with a
clear vision and a good strategy. And, there is no shame in getting help
from someone that can guide and coach you. Get yourself a partner you
trust that has experience with helping other clients succeed in their
transformation.

[^1]: Forsgren N., Humble, J., & Kim, G. (2018). Accelerate: The Science
    of Lean Software and DevOps: Building and Scaling High Performing
    Technology Organizations (1st ed.) \[E-book\]. IT Revolution Press.
    Page 22.

[^2]: John P. Kotter (2008), A Sense of Urgency, Harvard Business Review
    Press

[^3]: John P. Kotter (2012), Leading Change, Harvard Business Review
    Press

[^4]: Simon Sinek (2011), Start With Why -- How Great Leaders Inspire
    Everyone to Take Action, Penguin, p.38

[^5]: Volkswagen (2019): Volkswagen with New Corporate Mission Statement
    Environment "goTOzero":
    https://www.volkswagenag.com/en/news/2019/07/goTOzero.html

[^6]: Mercedes-Benz Group Media (2019): "Ambition2039": Our path to
    sustainable mobility: https://
    group-media.mercedes-benz.com/marsMediaSite/ko/en/43348842

[^7]: de Vries, M., & van Osnabrugge, R. (2022): Together we build an
    Engineering Culture. XPRT Magazine #12:
    https://xpirit.com/together-we-build-an-engineering- culture/

[^8]: Ravasi, D., & Schultz, M. (2006). Responding to organizational
    identity threats: Exploring the role of organizational culture.
    Academy of Management Journal.

[^9]: Michael Kaufmann (2022). Accelerate DevOps with GitHub: Enhance
    software delivery performance with GitHub Issues, Projects, Actions,
    and Advanced Security. Packt Publishing. P. 14.

[^10]: Doerr, J. (2018). Measure What Matters: OKRs: The Simple Idea
    that Drives 10x Growth. Portfolio Penguin
