On July 1^st^, 2022, [we
announced](https://xpirit.com/microsoft-gold-partner-and-github-verified-partner-xpirit-expands-its-business-to-the-usa/)
that Xebia would expand our Microsoft-focused consulting into the US by
starting Xpirit USA. Over the past 8 years, we established ourselves as
an authority in the world of Microsoft by leading the industry in
innovative ways to help our customers adopt Microsoft's cloud (Azure)
while enabling teams to take advantage of their new capabilities to
deliver software quickly and often. We build Engineering Cultures and
truly help drive change within organizations. We work closely with
Microsoft, in terms of our strong partnership on the commercial side as
well as working closely with the product teams that build the tools that
our customers adopt.

After a successful expansion into Belgium and Germany, we turned our
sights to the US and started official on July 1st. This is the story of
how this all began and a true example of staying true to our values and
principles can lead to an epic journey.

**It all started with a conversation...**

Marcel de Vries (our founder and CEO) is well known for his presence in
the Microsoft Community. Through his participation in both the RD and
MVP program, he is well connected to other thought leaders. It is no
coincidence that the CEO of Xpirit Germany, Michael Kaufman, is also an
RD and that the CEO and CTO of Xpirit Belgium, Gill Cleeren and Pieter
Gheysens is also well known as RD and MVP. This is also how Marcel got
to know Esteban Garcia. Marcel and Esteban knew each other for over ten
years through the Microsoft MVP and RD programs. Both had seen each
other's company's grow in the DevOps and Azure space. Esteban's company
was acquired by Cognizant in 2020 and now, in early 2021, the Microsoft
Business Group at Cognizant was looking to expand. They turned their
attention to the Netherlands, and specifically, towards Xpirit. Esteban
knew about the great reputation that Xpirit had and about the amazing
team that fueled the company, so he reached out to Marcel for a
conversation about the opportunity. That phone call was the start of
everything. At that moment, Xpirit was already part of the Xebia journey
with Waterland and the simple answer to whether Xpirit was for sale was
NO. But Marcel is great at turning things upside down, and asked, "What
if you give me a call when **you** want to build a new company?". And
that is exactly what happened in November of the same year. Xpirit had
just recently announced that they had expanded their business into
Germany, and that the expansion would be led by Michael Kaufmann as the
CEO. Because of the same MVP and RD program, Esteban also knows Michael
very well, and made him think, "what if we could do the same in the
US?".

Things got into motion with a new call, but with a different
conversation. What if we would start Xpirit in the USA, just as we just
did in Germany? Use our combined learnings and continue our Microsoft
Authority mission in the US?

Esteban already had an elaborate plan to build a new company, leveraging
his previous entrepreneurial experience to put together an amazing team.
Robert Bremmer and Esteban had been talking about it for a long time,
and the time was now. Rob would join him as the COO, bringing a wealth
of operational excellence to the table. Together, they could build the
company at an accelerated pace, much faster than we had done until now
in the Netherlands, Belgium, and Germany. These are lofty goals, and for
that, you need a strong core team. And of course, we must be able to
maintain our culture, follow our Authority mission, and be guided by our
Values. Once that is in place, our business grows from there.

We had seen this strategy work before, and we knew it would be a solid
plan. So next, we had a chat with Daan, Andrew, Stefan, and Anand to see
if we could make this plan work. We jointly agreed that building a new
company in the USA would be the best approach for starting a great
Microsoft Business. Long story short, together we built a business case,
brought that to Waterland and we got an agreement to get started.

In April 2022, Andrew and Marcel flew to Orlando, Florida, to meet the
future Xpirit USA team. They spent two days getting to know each other,
dreaming up the future of Xpirit USA, creating a concrete and elaborate
business plan, and making a plan that would take them to kick off. This
resulted in both Rob and Esteban saying YES to the plan and us working
together to make it happen.

We decided the start date would be July 1^st^, with Esteban and Rob
leading the way in our US expansion. While preparing to get started,
word got out and the team already started recruiting our first hire, an
awesome recruiter! We met Elizabeth, who worked at Wintellect, a company
with a similar DNA as Xebia and Xpirit. Wintellect had recently been
acquired by Atmosera, and their leadership had a talent for making
people run away to other companies. Elizabeth was looking for new
opportunities and was actively interviewing at companies with big names
in the tech world, and after hearing our stories and checking with her
network of trusted peers, she decided that a future with us exceeded
everything that other companies had to offer and joined us in June. So,
before we even got officially stared, we had our first employee!

We know that the Xebia success formula includes a great salesperson in
the team. Esteban knew exactly who to call -- Natalie Reinford, a
salesperson who has focused her career in Azure and knows the Microsoft
and GitHub ecosystem better than most people. In fact, Esteban hired her
in his prior entrepreneurial journey, and now it was time to get the
team together. She was working at Wintellect and she jumped at the
opportunity to join the Xpirit USA team and be part of this epic
journey. Now everything was in place, and it was time to look for
consultants so we could start delivering value to our customers.

Once we made the big announcement on July 1^st^, word spread quickly
through our networks, with our LinkedIn posts receiving over one
thousand responses from our connections. This resulted in a referral
from a Microsoft Regional Director well-known by Esteban and Marcel. And
just like that, we had our first applicant through the Xpirit website!
Stuart Celarier applied and took the Xpirit Hiring assessment, which
resulted in an offer. Stuart joined Xpirit USA on September 12^th^ this
year and became our first of many consultants. We also received
applications from people at Microsoft and GitHub, who are in the process
of getting hired. One of them, David Sanchez, joined us from Microsoft
on September 21^st^. As we write this article, we have five other
consultants in the process of interviewing or taking the Assessment.

The US is a big country and we've taken the show on the road. The team
traveled to Kansas City and had five presenters in front of over 1,500
attendees at KCDC (Kansas City Developers Conference). If this is not
enough, we also spent a week at the Microsoft campus in Redmond,
speaking with leadership at Microsoft and Github. We made great
connections and plans to partner closely globally. Most recently, we
were asked to be part of GitHub Universe, deliver workshops there, and
be part of the exclusive GitHub Partner Advisory Board. GitHub also
keeps looking to us to train Microsoft itself, Github Partners, and
sellers and develop a new certification Bootcamp to be rolled out
worldwide. The Xpirit USA team also traveled to Atlanta to work with
Vipul Baijal's Xebia USA team and look for ways to expand our offerings
within our existing customer base. In October, Esteban has been asked to
join Microsoft Ignite's firs in-person conference in Seattle, as a
speaker.

There is a lot of excitement and buzz happening as we get started and we
are on track to end this calendar year with at 15 employees, who will
work together with our teams in Germany, Belgium and the Netherlands to
support our customers globally.

It has been an amazing ride thus far and we are just getting started. We
have all the pieces in place to build a real epic company in the US, and
we are confident we will be able to make a real statement in the market
with our simple but also complex mission: Being an authority in the
Microsoft space.
