# The shift to cloud-native: Accelerated your innovation

The trend in the industry is clear. We need to accelerate our innovation
to stay on top of the curve. Cloud has become the default and now the
challenge lies in how can we transform our organization so we can
leverage all that is cloud. We need to move away from traditional
operating models where we have the IT department dictating how we need
to use IT. IT has become the business! This also means IT departments
needs to move away from a siloed demand supply organization and
re-invent themselves to get a seat at the table in the business. They
need to enable accelerated business innovation instead of being a
constraint in speed of delivery. They need to become a high performance
IT organization and reimagine how to empower everyone so they can use IT
in self-service while staying secure, compliant and efficient.

In this episode of our magazine we have various articles that can help
you paint a new picture of the future. How do you empower developers
with secure and performant desktops so they can deliver the software we
need so desperately while not compromising security. How you can
automate your CI/CD with GitHub actions and make sure the supply chain
that produces the software is secure by default. How can you embrace
opensource to learn new technologies and how can you bring software that
is mature and robust, but still a monolith to a cloud native
environment. What User interface technologies can you embrace to create
flexible and maintainable user interfaces to your customers. How can we
embrace the cloud and employ new techniques to ensure our software is
reliable and robust, while the cloud has a completely different
reliability model than your on premise datacenter.

With the cloud being part of virtually every business strategy we come
across we decided it is also time to spawn new businesses where we focus
on the delivery of cloud native software delivery and providing
customers with a cloud native managed services proposition. In this
magazine you will also learn how we are embarking on those new journeys
with our team of experts.

At Xpirit we had the pleasure and privilege to already walked a journey
with cloud native software development and managed services for the past
seven years. We learned so much along this journey that we never dreamed
possible. With our magazine we share many things we have learned
throughout our journey and we hope they will help you become more
successful in yours.

For us it is clear that the shift to cloud-native has started. We love
to be there with you side by side with our experts and help you
accelerated your innovation!
