# How a passion for sharing knowledge and community work led to the Techorama conference

Welcome to the special Techorama edition of our XPRT magazine! How did
this conference begin, and how do they find their amazing
(international) speaker line-up for a first conference year in the
Netherlands?

It all happened because of an amazing group of people that have a
passion for community work and sharing knowledge!

The roots of Techorama lie in Belgium, where Gill Cleeren, Pieter
Gheysens and Kevin DeRudder started this conference five years ago after
Techdays had ceased to exist. This team of community leaders thought it
would be a cool idea to organize an internationally recognized
conference, to replace Techdays. The conference was organized, and
Microsoft helped spread the word that Techorama would replace Techdays
in Belgium. The team built up a great network of speakers that loved to
speak at the conference. Techorama has always been about the experience
of both the attendees as well as speakers and this seems to resonate
very well given the success.

In its first year in Belgium Techorama attracted 600 attendees and in
subsequent years 800, 1000, 1500 and last year even 1600 attendees
attended! Techorama is a conference that is run mainly by the community.
The crew of volunteers has become an all-round team that runs the event
smoothly.

As you probably know, we at Xpirit have always supported knowledge
sharing in many ways and have been involved in supporting Techdays in
the Netherlands since the beginning. Last year it became clear that
Techdays in the Netherlands would also cease to exist. After over 15
years of existence, Techdays would leave a 'conference legacy' behind
and there would be no really good conferences to take its place. The
major changes in the Microsoft organization, including a reorganization
of their team of developer evangelists, left a vacuum, and it became
apparent to us that we would not have a great conference anymore.

Together with the help of the Dutch community we contacted the Techorama
Belgium team to see if we could do the same thing as in Belgium. After a
short conversation it was apparent that we could try to make this happen
in exactly the same way, and this was the birth of Techorama in the
Netherlands. To pull it off we needed to move fast, since organizing a
conference of this size is not a simple task.

We started with finding a location that would create the same experience
that is the signature of Techorama: a cinema location. Nothing is more
impressive as a presentation that is the size of a full-size movie. For
speakers it is also an amazing experience when you don't have to scale
up your fonts to make them readable during your demos. We found Path√© in
Ede to be the perfect place for the first Dutch edition. Together with
communities such as SDN, Stichting DotNed, .NET Zuid, .NET Noord, .NET
Oost and meetup organizers in the Microsoft community, we crafted the
complete plan. We sent out a Call for Papers and received an
overwhelming 800 session submissions! Well-known international speakers
submitted awesome sessions and we selected over 100 talks to be
delivered over the course of two days. So, we had a great mix of
international and local established speakers and thought leaders to
educate our attendees on the latest and greatest in technology.

We also sought a really awesome keynote speaker and this made us reach
out to Scott Guthrie, Executive Vice President of the Cloud and
Enterprise group in
[Microsoft](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microsoft). Scott is a
well-respected speaker and one of the few executives that will still
code on stage. We asked him if he would like to help us in our efforts
to create a new conference to train the Dutch community on the latest
Microsoft technology. You can imagine how excited we were when we
received the news that he was willing to do so.

Early April we kicked off the sales of the conference tickets, and at
first things did not look that promising. We were confronted with the
fact that most people decide very late to buy a ticket. Fortunately, we
received a lot of support and encouragement from many companies. We were
contacted by many partners who helped us establish the conference and
spread the word on what we were trying to achieve.

And now here we are. Techorama Netherlands is a fact. We have an amazing
speaker lineup, we have a big group of wonderful supporting partners and
best of all we have over 900 attendees the first year!

We are looking forward to a great first edition and we hope our effort
to build this new learning experience is to your liking. We are thrilled
to welcome you and hope you have an awesome experience!

I want to give a special thanks to the following amazing community
leaders who made Techorama possible: Gill Cleeren, Pieter Gheysens,
Kevin DeRudder, Dennis Vroegop, Sjoukje Zaal, Marcel Meijer, Roland
Guijt, Andre Obelink, Barry Luijbregts, Gerald Versluis, Andre Kamman
and Albert Alberts.

Marcel de Vries

CTO Xpirit
