**Sink or Swim?**\
**How do you Survive a Forced Digital Transformation?**\
\
Behind every digital transformation, there's usually a solid,
well-considered plan and matching strategy. Due to COVID-19 and the
suddenly changing economy, many companies feel forced to digitize
immediately. All of a sudden, everyone is expected to be able to work
remotely. It requires much effort to make everything work digitally,
straight away.

**How do you survive such a forced digital transformation?**

Marcel de Vries, CTO, and founder of Xpirit, a subsidiary of Xebia, the
Dutch Powerhouse in Amsterdam, say\'s, \"We compare the current
situation somewhat with swimming lessons. First, you carefully put your
toe in the water to make sure it\'s not too cold, then suddenly you\'re
pushed into the water, how well do you swim? The big question is, what
is your reaction when you have recovered from the initial shock? Do you
swim back to where you fell in, or do you adapt and swim in the
direction of the new environment? If you give it some thought, swimming
in the new direction turns out to be better than you ever expected!\"
According to de Vries.

Many companies have spontaneously accelerated into a digital
transformation, with all employees forced to work from home. They may
have had a digital transformation plan on their to-do-list but didn't
implement it. At moments like this, decisions reached in crisis mode.
Which generally take weeks or even months, can have enormous,
incalculable consequences.

"On one hand, you immediately start with digital collaboration. Think of
using Zoom or Microsoft Teams. On the other hand, you face the challenge
of applying remote engineering. Your engineers located throughout the
country suddenly have to bring software to production with their teams.
How do you do that when you are not near to a colleague? How do you do
that when you need to depend on the development software in your
company? How do you ensure that everyone can access it safely and still
stay compliant?

Keeping their head above the water is currently a top priority for every
company. In a crisis like this, essential issues as risk and compliance
do not come first. In the past, you could easily take the time to look
at all possibilities, and companies are now choosing business
continuity. De Vries says: "It simply takes too long to carry out an
extensive risk assessment. You need to immediately make sure that your
entire business does not come to a halt. You will solve problems later!
That is a logical choice if you are in crisis management mode."

\"Due to the current situation, there is also more leeway for temporary
solutions. It makes everything more fluid, after which you can still do
the remediation to fix it. Adjust afterward and see what you should have
done differently or better. That\'s exactly the right mode for
companies. Work-based on feedback and adjust! We instructed companies to
implement this model before the crisis. It can still help them now be
more efficient. We know what it means to do a digital transformation. We
have been doing this for the past five years. We know what\'s involved.
Let us help you optimize your current state and help you accelerate.
After all, you are now in the water, so let us teach you how to swim the
fastest and smartest. That is what we do, and instead of planning for
it, we now can help you act on it right away.\"

**The IT Consultant as a lifeguard**

According to de Vries, executing a so-called forced digital
transformation is a blessing in disguise. \"Many companies had cold feet
for the transformation but are now thrown into the deep at once, where
they have to learn to swim immediately, so they\'re forced to deploy
their digital transformations faster. Now that you\'re in the water, it
is instrumental that you learn how to swim more efficiently or how to
last longer if you swim in a different direction. We have known the pool
for a while\...\"

*\"We often encounter resistance and cold feet at companies; at some
point, you sometimes feel like giving them a push. But of course, that
would not be appreciated.\"*

Above all, companies should not think that they are already there and
absolutely should not go back to the \'old\' way. \"You are already in
the pool. Go for a swim and keep your head above water. Please take
advantage of it and start seeing it as an opportunity. If you go back to
the old way, all the pressure and misery has been a waste of time. At
banks and insurance companies, we see that the new way is working. Some
of them already plan to downsize their offices. Embrace what is good and
only throw away what does not work. Otherwise, there are many missed
opportunities. You also see change-oriented organizations. They are
moving ahead and taking advantage of what is currently happening. These
are the companies that emerge as digital winners. Those are the
organizations that say; it will never be as before. It is wiser to go
ahead and win the race. We are now swimming anyway, so let\'s aim to be
first across the pool.\"

*"Our consultants enjoy entering this phase. Beyond the resistance. You
feel and experience the pain at the moment, and you have to take
advantage of that."*

**Cost-saving, more safety, better compliance, and cooperation; remote
engineering**

Many companies that have now taken the first deep dive into digitization
are currently confronted with high, unnecessary costs and do not yet
work efficiently. Their current implementations are not designed to be
compliant and still have a high risk of not being implemented safely.
The number of cybersecurity attacks is currently unprecedented. It
creates enormous problems in the future that must be repaired. "Before
data is out on the street, it is better to assess and adapt fast.

There are also many smarter ways to optimize collaboration. It would be
best if you adapted to the model of the high performing IT organization,
working in value streams, according to DevOps. Secure and compliant by
default." Says de Vries.

**The costs for a digital transformation quickly recouped**.

Especially when you first start helping with the cost side of a company.
"Everyone will be confronted with high digitization costs in the coming
months. We can often quickly provide insights on what can be done much
cheaper and more efficiently. Our Cloud assessment e.g., provides you
with advice on where you can save costs and which investments you can or
should make to earn back even more in the long term."

**The choice for a digital transformation depends on which angle one
comes.**

De Vries says: "Is the goal cost optimization? Then we can do a scan,
looking at how you set up Cloud subscriptions, what your cloud spend is,
and how cloud native your software architecture currently is. Based on
this, we can advise you on the measures to take that save costs. For
example, by adjusting your architecture, optimizing functionality, and
using the technology already there, we can make smart changes to your
software so that you can adopt native cloud functionalities and no
longer have to choose for expensive options. Think about setting up more
efficient plans for your virtual machines or making some software that
utilizes the serverless capabilities of the cloud. In the cloud, you pay
per use. That's different compared to the billing you have been used to
form your datacenter or hosting provider. We can also show you exactly
when you have recouped the investment. Architectural changes can often
be recouped in 3 months or half a year, depending on the size, of
course."

\"**When it comes to collaboration, DevOps, and remote engineering, you
need to look at how teams can work together more effectively and
efficiently.**

If you are adopting DevOps tools like Azure DevOps or Github as a
service, it would be best to make your teams work smarter together.
Smart collaboration and ease of CI / CD setups are a few examples. It\'s
the crucial moment you can embrace DevOps principles. You will
significantly increase your efficiency by actually doing continuous
deployment and bringing your software to production several times a
day.\"

*\"Everything is going remote; there is no reason to be in the office.
Unfortunately, that is sometimes still in the minds of people.
Fortunately, we can do Everything remotely.\"*

\"Where one normally has a software development team in an office, these
developers now work from home. It is shifting from local engineering to
remote engineering. Offering many opportunities, overlooked with an
office mindset. You can now have a larger talent pool you can draw from
since locality is not an issue. You can develop software 24/7 at lower
labor costs. Azure DevOps, GitHub, Visual Studio Online, and Azure Cloud
are useful services to support that. With this technology, you can work
worldwide. \"The tooling for remote engineering is simply available, but
unfortunately, it is still not mainstream for many companies. Today,
hosting your software development tools yourself is not efficient and
productive anymore. Just purchase the already available SaaS product,
then you don\'t have to manage the infrastructure anymore yourself, and
you can use that time to create value for your customers.\" say\'s de
Vries.

**Xpirit has been successful in setting up and guiding companies towards
the Cloud for more than five years.**

They have gained a lot of knowledge and experience in the field of what
does and does not work and learned a lot from it. By learning from
mistakes, they can protect customers from this. "Everyone has the right
to make their own mistakes, but sometimes it is beneficial to know what
you will encounter in advance. The choice is yours. Do you want to
experience it first before you run into it, or do you learn it from
someone else?"

Xpirit is ideally suited to help with the knowledge injection you need
now.

They do not pull it out of your hands, which creates a dependency, but
come to help with the knowledge that is now needed to immediately start
working faster and more efficiently, after which your teams can all
\'swim themselves\'. Say\'s De Vries: \"Instead of taking everyone out
of the water, we will teach your team how to swim best in this pool.
Because of the experience we have gained over the years at banks,
insurance companies, and ISVs, we have gathered quite some insights into
what works and what doesn\'t. e.g., the compliance requirements and laws
that come up every time. We now know how to set up Azure in such an
environment, compliant with requirements, such as SOC 2 Type II, Cobit,
ISO and SOX, etc. We even made standard solutions for it.\"

**Adopt & Embrace**

\"Where are you now? Look back and decide what you want to keep and what
you want to throw away. Don\'t go back to what was. The only way is
forward. It\'s your chance. Go for it. With our knowledge and expertise,
we are happy to help you look retrospectively at how the transformation
has been for you thus far and where the opportunities are for you.
Companies that say we want to, adopt and embrace, are the digital
winners of the future\", says de Vries.
