![Laurens & Maira ](./media/image1.jpeg)


[\[titelfoto Laurens en Maira\]]{.mark}

***Title:*** Taking Notes Like A Boss

***What is sketchnoting?***

Sketchnoting is all about capturing ideas, not about creating art. It's
a way to think on paper using images and words. According to the creator
of sketchnoting, Mike Rohde, when you are taking carefully hand-written
notes and embellishing them with illustrations, you are sketchnoting.
This way of visual thinking results in rich visual notes, mixing
handwriting and drawing to create a more appealing set of notes.

***Why is it useful?***

If you create visuals while listening and taking notes, the mind uses
different capacities to process data and allows you to remember it up to
29% better. The physical action of taking notes combined with the
creative action of visualization allows you to focus more and filter out
the important bits.

For introverts like ourselves, creating sketchnoting is a kind of magic,
especially at events. When people see you drawing, they feel invited to
come over and have a chat about what you're doing.

When we work with clients, we have noticed it is usually more effective
to show people what is happening rather than tell them. It tends to come
across as less confrontational. This allows us to be very direct about
stuff. We can be typically Dutch, without being overly blunt!

***How we became sketchnoters***

[\[teamfoto Laurens en Maira\]]{.mark}

![Laurens & Maira ](./media/image5.jpeg)


(Maira) "As a DevOps and test-automation consultant, I'm used to
visualizing processes, pipelines, and other information, but I never
considered myself good enough to be a *real* sketchnoter. I was going to
attend the Web Summit in Lisbon and felt this was an opportunity to get
started. Five days of drawing all these talks! My sister-in-law taught
me the basics of sketchnoting in one afternoon, and I was off to the
races! As the conference progressed, I improved my craft, and people
noticed. They came over to have a chat. Some asked me whether I was
hired by the conference to do this. Others just complimented me, then
took a picture and shared my work online. And then, the conference
organizers offered me a front-row seat at the press table, because they
had seen my conference sketchnotes online and loved them."

[\[twitter icon gebruiken\] @]{.mark}mairacamu

(Laurens) "When I encountered sketchnoting, it appealed to me, because
as it turned out I had been doing it for the past decade, thinking I
should really structure my "mind maps" more like the father of mind
mapping Tony Buzan. Then I saw an awesome TEDx video by renowned graphic
facilitator Rachel Smith from The Grove Consultants and encountered The
Sketchnote Army. It dawned on me that what I had been doing had a name,
it was not as strange and uniquely "me" as I had previously thought, and
it was gaining momentum as a cool thing to do at conferences and
meetings. I decided to get better at sketchnoting and went looking for
ways to do so. I joined a Meetup group by Petra Hegenbart and read The
Sketchnote Handbook by Mike Rohde. And then, I just started sketchnoting
everywhere. At conferences of course, but also in meetings,
presentations, and workshops."

[\[twitter icon gebruiken\] @]{.mark}laurensbonnema

***You are a sketchnoter too!***

First, get some gear. Do not overthink sketchnoting, you most likely
have everything you need within reach. Grab a pen to write with and take
a marker to add some color and use a sheet of paper.

Start adding doodles -- tiny drawings or sketches -- to your notes. Use
banners, headers, even draw the speaker using a stick figure. If you use
color, stick to one tone or use two *complementary colors*\*[\[link in
voetnoot\].]{.mark} This will immediately make your work look more
professional. Also try using different styles of writing, a calligraphy
font combined with basic capital letters instantly looks good!

[\*https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Complementary_colors]{.mark}

***Favorite sketchnoter tools***

If you are like us, you probably prefer to select "the best" gear for
everything, including your sketchnoting gear. If that sounds like you,
these are our suggestions:

-   Pens: a black fine-liner, gel-pen, or ballpoint. We use Artline
    drawing system fineliners size 0.3 to 0.7.

-   Markers: a grey marker, and one or two complementary colors. We use
    Neuland Markers for this and absolutely love them. They are
    refillable, so not just good for you, but also for the planet!

-   Paper: Moleskine, 120g A4/A3, flip-chart, plotter paper. We don't
    have a very strong preference here, except that the ink should not
    bleed on the paper, usually this means getting slightly heavier
    paper such as 90 or 120 grams.

![](./media/image6.jpg)
![A screenshot of a cell phone Description
automatically
generated](./media/image7.png)


We suggest getting one or two books about sketchnoting and visual
thinking for inspiration and more guidelines. Our recommendation would
be Mike Rohde's The Sketchnote Handbook and The Sketchnote Workbook.

[\[foto workbook en handbook\]]{.mark}

[\[callout blok\]]{.mark}

**Basic Rules**

-   Everyone can do it, and no one draws like you.

-   Embrace your mistakes, don't correct grammar or anything, just keep
    going and stay in the flow of drawing. (Sorry for the perfectionists
    out there)

-   Never start over, it's about telling the story, so keep going.

[\[/callout blok\]]{.mark}

***Learn in public!***

We have found that one of the best ways to get started is to learn in
public. So grab your favorite pen, some paper, and create your first
sketchnote! Then, just post it on Instagram or Twitter with the hashtags
\@SketchnoteArmy #sketchnote and #mairarocks to get instant feedback.
You will be amazed of the positive vibe in the online community.

Pro-tip: People tend to take photos while you are sketchnoting, so make
sure to sign your work before you start drawing with your
\@Twitter/Instagram handle and a *#hashtag*.

***Need more encouragement?***

![https://hubs.ly/H0gQG8Y0](./media/image8.png)
Once you get hooked to sketchnoting and
you want to learn more and get inspired, you can also advance your
skills by joining us in *Agile Sketchnoting and Graphic Recording*
course and we will do it together! In this training Laurens and Maira
will help you learn and develop your skills!

<https://hubs.ly/H0gQG8Y0>

[\[QR code en link]{.mark}\]

![DevOps Migration](./media/image9.jpeg)
![](./media/image10.jpeg)


![Websummit Conference ](./media/image11.jpeg)


![WebSummit Conference](./media/image12.jpeg)


[\[Overige foto's om te gebruiken bij opmaak, graag ergens speels
toevoegen of aan de onderkant een balk \]]{.mark}
