13 is a lucky number

Friday, 9th September, was our Xpirit Innovation Day. With around 100
people from Xpirit Netherlands, Xpirit Belgium, Xpirit Germany and
Xpirit USA we innovated on all the things we like. The last few times,
we combined our innovation day with some global team building with
drinks, dinners and a great location. This time we went back "to normal"
at our office. Personally, I really liked this. Back to the essence of
our innovation day and actually our company. Sharing Knowledge and
learning together. Our innovation day has no rules or boundaries, no
required deliverables (besides a demo at the end of the day) and is
fully focused on learning!

When I walked around the office during our innovation day, I picked up
the first magazine we created back in 2015. It looks different, the
content has become irrelevant, but in its essence, it is the same. Great
articles written by passionate people that write about the things they
love. Sharing their knowledge and working on their and our authority
mission. Back then, I was extremely proud when we produced this first
magazine. And that feeling did not change with the 11 editions that
followed. Fast forward to this 13^th^ edition, I am still extremely
proud of our magazine, but even more our knowledge driven culture. The
only thing that changed is we are now 100 people instead of 8.

All these 100 people that are sharing knowledge and work with our
customers have another thing in common. We all help our customers to
become a high-performing software company by helping them build an
inclusive and secure organizational culture that fosters talent and is
driven by sharing and equality so they can achieve the impossible. We
call this building an engineering culture. In our previous magazine we
talked about what an Engineering Culture is and introduced the eight
pillars that contribute to this. It all starts with **State of the Art
Software Engineering** where we focus on building high-quality software.
The pillar **Smooth Delivery** describes all the work and knowledge we
need to get this software in production. **Appropriate Continuity** is
all about Security and Compliance and keeping the software running. We
do this to help customers to **Move the business needle**. To enable
this and get the desired speed, we use the **Power through Platforms**
and an **Empowering Operating Model.** We can only enable this to be a
**Knowledge Driven** company where we share and build knowledge. And
last but not least, we need to build an **Epic Workplace.**

This building of an engineering culture is the central theme that binds
us at Xpirit. We all work to achieve this from our own perspective and
expertise. And this magazine is another great reflection of this.

We are still on top when it comes to State of the Art Software
Engineering. In this magazine, you can find a number of great articles.
We talk about Bitrot, Blazor, Wiremock, Frontends and Nullable Reference
types. You can also see that we build on the shoulders of giants by
leveraging the Power Through Platforms. Our guest writer from GitHub,
Remco Vermeulen, writes about GitHub in combination with
CodeQL. We share our finding on the security investigation on GitHub
actions We show how Azure Virtual Desktop can really help you to
leverage the power of cloud. You can also read an article about Azure
Digital Twins and how it can help [you to]{.mark} use the power of IoT
combined with 3D visualization.



We have an article on monitoring using Grafana and how it can help to
assure the continuity of the business. On a somewhat higher abstract
level, we talk about moving the business needle, and last but not least,
we introduce you to our new member of the Xpirit group, Xpirit USA.

In This 13^th^ magazine, you will find 13 great articles. It is a
reflection of what keeps us busy at the moment. A treasure of knowledge
and hopefully an inspiration for you, our reader. That said, 13 is
definitely a lucky number. Please let us know what you think on any of
our channels, and thank you for reading! Enjoy!
