Welcome to Xpirit Magazine

With great pride I welcome you to the very first edition of Xpirit
Magazine. Our journey to make a real difference in IT started in
November 2014, when Xebia and a group of very talented people came
together to found Xpirit, a new company that always puts people first,
and chooses to only work with the very best so our customers achieve
more.

At Xpirit we firmly live to our core principles of People First, Quality
Without Compromise, Customer Intimacy, and Sharing Knowledge. As the
foundation of our organization, our core principles ensure we stay
focused on helping our customers reach their full potential, while we
get to do the work we love. At Xpirit we are more than just a
consultant, we are always looking towards the future. And because we
take our profession seriously, we invest more time to really understand
our customers, and seek out innovative solutions that will help them
succeed. We do make a difference, because that is what we are:
different!

This Xpirit Magazine is an expression of one of our core principles:
sharing knowledge. You'll find in-depth articles on emerging
technologies that only a select few have experienced. That's because at
Xpirit our team lives at the cutting edge (like our article on
Hololens), it's what makes our people tick and it's a competitive
advantage that will make your organization stand apart.

Along with publishing articles, you'll see us at conferences around the
world where we present sessions and workshops on the latest developments
in cloud-based solutions, application lifecycle management and
enterprise mobility. You might already have met members of our team at
Microsoft Tech-Ed Europe, Visual Studio Live Las Vegas, Visual Studio
Live San Francisco, Techorama Belgium, Techdays in The Hague or
DevIntersection in Amsterdam. As a core principle, sharing knowledge
ensures we grow as people and as a company.

Microsoft is supporting our business model to ensure we succeed by
applying their best technologies, and in the keynotes at this month's
important Ignite and Build conferences, Microsoft was very clear on
their Cloud First and Mobile First strategy. Build and Ignite opened
with the latest Microsoft offerings, and as an integral contributor to
the Techdays, these are areas in which we thrive. In fact, our Xpirit
magazine is an expression of our mission statement; "Think Ahead, Act
Now".

Our Techdays speakers have developed articles for this edition of Xpirit
that provide you with insightful reference material on emerging
technologies. For more details, please contact us directly, or if you
missed a session, give us a call so we can ensure you're kept fully
informed. We love sharing knowledge and want to help you move your
business forward.

Included in this first edition of Xpirit Magazine are articles on mobile
cloud development and Azure stack, along with our first in-depth
experience on software development using the brand-new Microsoft
Hololens. There's also a great article on Git versus TFS that critically
examines the competitive advantages of both new and proven technologies.
You'll get plenty of food for thought with our vision on migrating
applications to a microservices architecture and the best way to start
with Visual Studio Release Management, as well as new ideas to take your
IT and business to the next level with our insights into implementing a
build-measure-learn loop. At Xpirit, we really understand your business!

We wish you a pleasant and informative time reading this magazine, and
look forward to hearing from you.

Pascal Greuter

Managing Director Xpirit
