Just in time before the holiday starts, we are proud to present to you
with the tenth edition of our Xpirit magazine. It has been quite the
journey since we presented you with our first edition in early 2015 only
a few months after we started our company. Sharing knowledge is part of
our DNA, and this is something that we are determined to keep doing. The
past few months have been extremely challenging for our talented team,
while they needed to work fulltime from home and at the same time be a
fantastic parent, teacher, partner, and employee. Of course, this
wasn\'t easy, and yes, it took everyone a lot of energy to make it work,
but still, there is so much energy and passion left that the team was
determined to deliver you this magazine just before the start of the
holiday season. What better time could we pick to bring you a series of
articles of new learnings, new technologies, and new insights in the way
we can use technology and people to move our society forward.

In this edition, you will find a variety of articles from deeply
technical to more inspirational. And that is where the magic lies,
combining the in-depth technical with the human side of our industry. We
also received some great articles from well-known industry influencers,
of whom we find it a privilege to call them close friends. Leni Lobel,
who is a renowned industry expert in the domain of Cosmos DB was so kind
as to write an exclusive article for this edition on Data Modeling and
Partitioning in Cosmos DB. And Martin Woodward, who recently moved from
Microsoft to GitHub, and who provided us with his insights and knowledge
on how to successfully implement inner source in your company in order
to manage shared code across various teams.

It is with great pride that we are presenting you with this new edition
of our magazine, even in these challenging times. We hope you will all
enjoy reading our knowledge and insights and that they will inspire you
and help you in your career in the years to come. Stay safe, stay
healthy, and enjoy!

Marcel de Vries

CTO Xpirit
