**XPIRIT EMBRACES SPACE FRAMEWORK TO MEASURE DEVELOPER PRODUCTIVITY**

**Developed by Microsoft and GitHub and embraced by Xpirit, the new
SPACE framework provides guidance to an industry challenge: measuring
developer productivity. Why is a greater understanding of what affects
software developers\' productivity levels needed? Marcel de Vries, CTO
of Xpirit, elaborates on the framework\'s usability and shares his view
on productivity.**

MEASURING OUTPUT

Simply put, productivity indicates how efficiently you produce, usually
measured by output. But is it that simple? In software development, this
way of thinking has many pitfalls. For a long time, it hasn\'t been easy
to measure productivity correctly. Does the number of tickets, lines of
code, or deployments per day provide a good indication of how productive
an individual is? Marcel doesn\'t think so: \"If you look at how much
code was written, that simply reflects how busy someone was, but it says
nothing about the usefulness and quality of what was delivered. If
someone solves a problem in ten lines instead of twenty, that can be
considered as a more efficient solution, but is that really the case?
And more importantly, you get what you measure. When people know they
are measured by the number of deployments, they will deploy more often,
but what do they deploy and does it solve the business need?\"

*\"Developer productivity is an elusive concept. You cannot think in
terms of numbers. The only things you know, without diving in deep, are
if the software solves the problem it\'s supposed to, and the time it
took to get from idea to solution.\"* - Marcel de Vries, CTO Xpirit.

THE IMPORTANCE OF GAINING INSIGHT

The reason that developer productivity is receiving more attention is
twofold. On the one hand, the demand for software is greater than the
supply. On the other hand, strict compliance and security requirements
negatively impact productivity. To overcome these challenges,
organizations require insight into the factors that affect productivity.
Marcel adds: \"The industry needs to change too. Instead of seeing
software developers as an extra set of hands, I would like organizations
to realize what we can contribute to the envisioning of business
solutions. However, we also have a part in that. Developers often
portray themselves as nerds who can\'t communicate. An image that
doesn\'t fit the industry\'s current state and does our profession a
disservice. We also need to change the stereotype. If you, as a
developer, struggle to communicate, it\'s up to you to learn.\"

TAKING A HOLISTIC APPROACH

We cannot measure productivity with one single metric. The SPACE
framework takes a much-needed holistic approach by using five factors:
satisfaction, performance, activity, communication, and efficiency.
Marcel elaborates: \"Unlike DORA, which focuses on organizational
indicators that show the success of DevOps, SPACE enables us to look at
productivity from multiple dimensions that in relationship to each other
can help us decode the actual productivity factors in your business
context.\"

The first factor that SPACE addresses is satisfaction. Marcel
elaborates: \"Delivering software is a creative profession that requires
a particular mindset. People must feel good about themselves, both in
business and in life, to deliver. That\'s why, at Xpirit, we operate
\'people first.\' We pay attention to each others\' wellbeing, learn
from each other, voice our appreciation, and make sure we all feel safe
in a group.\"

The second factor is performance. Instead of using this as a standalone
metric, SPACE relates it to the other factors to produce a balanced
outcome. Marcel: \"The risk of measuring performance is that by
measuring, you are already influencing productivity, which brings us
back to the importance of making people feel safe. Additionally, you
need to understand what you are measuring and if this is
all-encompassing.\"

SPACE also focuses on communications and collaboration. According to
Marcel, leadership has a significant role to play in this: \"Leaders
need to stimulate concepts like pair programming, mob programming and
start create stable teams that get work done. We also need to move away
from a traditional project-based approach where you create a temporary
organization that the moment it becomes productive is destroyed, since
the project is ended.\" On communication, Marcel laughingly says: \"When
software developers are asked to improve communication, our default is
to build a new app or platform. That is unfortunately inherent to our
profession, but of course not what we need.\"

FINDING YOUR FLOW

The pandemic helped us see the benefits of working online, such as more
equality and less travel. But, it also introduced us to a new downside.
The threshold to disturb someone while working lowered, making it more
challenging to stay in your flow. Marcel believes we have to learn to
switch off and go into focus mode. \"It\'s ok not to answer your phone
because you are busy writing code and stay in your flow! It is commonly
known that task switching is the killer of productivity. To get back in
your flow can take up to hours!\"

When asked how to get into your flow, Marcel jokingly answers:
\"According to the Ballmer peak, a blood alcohol concentration between
0.129 and 0.138 % confers superhuman programming ability.\" He
continues: \"Being in the flow is different for everyone. From listening
to music while coding, isolating yourself completely, or finding
inspiration in an article. It\'s a unique state of mind in which your
thoughts become code. You forget about eating, drinking, and time. All
that matters is writing amazing code. If this only happens once every
month, overall productivity might be considered low. Nonetheless, the
quality of work you produce in your flow is unmatchable.\"

XPIRIT AND THE SPACE FRAMEWORK

For a concluding reflection on productivity, Marcel cites his
experience: "In our everyday work with customers, we come across many
silos, which is not surprising, since operational excellence dictates
dividing your business into departments. But, by doing that, you create
delays in the process because you interrupt the flow. You can overcome
that with Agile and DevOps. If you look at the measurements in the SPACE
framework you can see that those ways of work can contribute
significantly to higher productivity. The SPACE framework gives us an
even better understanding of what factors increase or decrease
productivity in your business. We use the framework to measure
productivity, create dashboards and generate insights. We then observe
your way of working, identify the indicators that influence
productivity, and take an active, targeted approach to improve."

We'll elaborate on the SPACE framework in a series of blogposts, each
covering one of the five dimensions during the coming weeks. Be sure to
check the Xpirit website to stay tuned!

SPACE is the acronym for Satisfaction & well-being, Performance,
Activity, Communication and collaboration, and Efficiency and flow. Each
of these dimensions is key to understanding and measuring productivity,
according to the researchers. For each of them, the framework suggests a
number of distinct metrics that apply to different levels, including
individual-, team- or group-, and system-level. Interestingly, SPACE
does not advocate for using all of the metrics at once, rather to
carefully select a reduced set of metrics that span across all three
levels and capture different productivity dimensions. The full article
outlining the SPACE framework has been published at
https://queue.acm.org/.
