**Launching Xpirit IoT: Smart & Connected Services**

The impact of Internet of Things (IoT) is made clear by its moniker as
the third wave of computing -- right after computers and smart phones.
All three waves are still having massive impact on all aspects of
society. Embedding sensors and compute power in consumer products and
industrial equipment has unlocked a new world of insights,
optimizations, and autonomous behavior. We expect IoT to continue to
transform many industries in the coming years, and we see interesting
challenges ahead that fit our core expertise: continuous integration
extending to the embedded domain, and an overall need for higher code
quality delivered in ever-shortening cycles. In this new and exciting
domain, we can utilize our Cloud and DevOps expertise, knowing that
Microsoft is adding IoT-specific features and services to the Azure
cloud on a regular basis. End-to-end security and robustness are
must-have ingredients in the IoT domain, and we are ready to deliver.

**IoT is here to stay**

Regardless of which analysis report on IoT you open, the trend is clear:
IoT is on a strong growth trajectory, with no signs of slowing down
anytime soon. Even our personal lives are touched by IoT: from smart
lighting to intelligent thermostats, more and more consumer products are
becoming "smart", meaning they can share data to ultimately deliver new
services and new experiences. And as we are becoming accustomed to
having real-time insights in key data such as our home's energy
footprint, it only makes sense that those same types of immediate
insights drive major digital transformations in the corporate world.

At its heart, IoT is about connecting "things", an intentionally broad
term that encompasses an entire world of physical devices: machines,
vehicles and buildings often come to mind, but "things" also include
human- and animal-wearable devices, sensor networks deployed across
farms or nature reserves, and many, many more. Connecting all these
devices together gives unparalleled insights in what is happening in the
real world, in real-time. Those insights alone can help transform
businesses, since understanding and the ability to measure is at the
heart of making improvements. Taking actions based on the insights
generated by connecting things is the next step in creating an
IoT-powered value chain, regardless of whether those actions are
performed by those same things or somewhere else entirely.

Predictive Maintenance is but one of the strong recipes for success IoT
can bring to the table: by analyzing equipment sensor data & behavior,
looming failures can be detected and corrected before service is
interrupted. This not only applies to major industrial equipment but can
be just as valuable for keeping your domestic heating equipment up and
running: instead of sending a service engineer every year, IoT makes it
possible to only send someone if and when your boiler is in need of
maintenance. This drives down cost, improves quality of life, and
prevents unnecessary travel, all in a single stroke.

**IoT touches many industries**

IoT is sometimes labeled as the "real-time revolution": a major change
driven by data that gives insight in the here and now. This availability
of immediate data has impact on almost every industry. Precision farming
uses sensors to monitor crops, weather, and livestock, allowing farmers
to respond in the right way, at the right time. Valuable assets in
construction can be tracked and secured but can also be used to their
fullest potential by connecting real-time insights to planning and
resource availability. Inventory tracking in warehouses and stockpiles
improves efficiency and effectiveness of supply chains, and monitoring
spaces in office buildings and stores can dramatically improve safety
whilst reducing the CO~2~ footprint.

![](./media/image1.png)

Although there is a huge number of potential use cases in each industry,
there are a set of common denominators that can help us to understand
where opportunities lie. Most use cases fall in one of three main
categories: core optimizations, improving performance and experience,
and transforming businesses. As an example, reducing inventory and
optimizing logistics can help reduce cost, whereas real-time insights
can dramatically improve customer experience. IoT can also be a driver
to develop new business models in existing industries, and help
companies shift from building products to delivering digital services.

In addition to classifying IoT initiatives in terms of their impact to
the business, we identify six domains across the multitude of
industries, use cases and generic applications like predictive
maintenance and remote inspections, to further reduce complexity of the
IoT landscape. These domains help us create focus in building our
expertise and our portfolio of services, and we have found them to be
helpful in assessing customer realities as well:

-   Connected assets: owned stationary equipment

-   Connected vehicles: tracking location and many other aspects of
    vehicles on the road

-   Connected products: (durable) consumer goods

-   Connected spaces: includes smart buildings, but also any other
    facility where automation revolves around optimizing occupancy and
    space utilization

-   Connected inventory: non-connected goods tracked by external control
    mechanisms

-   Connected people: wearables and other tools to augment workers and
    individuals

![](./media/image2.png)


**IoT needs a team to drive it**

Doing IoT "right" takes more than connecting a few devices and calling
it a day. IoT adds complex aspects to the already complicated world of
enterprise architecture and IT management: it comes with a whole new
class of embedded IT devices that need to be managed in terms of
connectivity and updates, but that also have their specific challenges
including power management, battery status and physical security and
maintenance.

When deploying data platforms or applications, there are usually easy
fallback scenarios if something goes wrong. In IoT, there is the added
challenge of not only deploying to thousands of devices that only offer
very limited ability for interaction, but also to devices that are often
hard or impossible to reach if something goes wrong. Every IoT developer
has experienced some version of sending out an update to a device, only
to be rewarded with the deafening silence of a no-longer-responding
piece of equipment.

In addition to the complexity brought on by the volume of data that an
IoT solution can generate, many developers have only had limited
experience in working with time-based data streams that typically come
with IoT scenarios. Although the Microsoft Azure cloud platform has
several easy to leverage components tailored to this, managing real-time
data flows is just another aspect that drives up the complexity of an
IoT project.

An overview of key IoT challenges would not be complete without
mentioning the elephant in the room: security. Every IoT device deployed
increases the attack surface of an organization, potentially with poorly
secured devices that rarely get updated. Stories of casinos being hacked
through their fish tank automation system make for good headlines, but
also bring major headaches to IT and security departments everywhere.

The news coverage of IoT in the market comes with additional side
effects: not only will the expectations for success of an IoT journey in
a typical organization be very high, but you can almost guarantee there
will be a commercially available platform or solution out there that can
cover at least some of what that organization is trying to achieve. The
"build versus buy" decisions in IoT can become very complex, very
quickly, especially in domains where the end state is a landscape of
built and bought components that are expected to work together
seamlessly. A typical example is a "smart building": there will be
different systems from different vendors for lighting, climate, and
access control, but the end user expects a smart space that just works.
In practice, we often implement point solutions for various subdomains
and then add a "platform of platforms": a control layer to make a system
of smart components act as one entity.

**Ingredients for a successful IoT journey**

![](./media/image3.png)


To tackle IoT successfully, it is imperative to embed four major
disciplines in your to-be organization: envisioning, developing,
continuous improvement, and governance. Envisioning is all about
establishing and guarding the vision for the IoT journey, and keeping
the higher-level goals top of mind: what is the purpose and expected
outcome of an IoT initiative, and how do ongoing development and new
insights influence the overall direction and priorities?

Building the ability to run, maintain and further improve IoT solutions
into the supporting organization is often postponed, but needs to be
there before the first launch of a product, even if it is only in pilot
or MVP stage. Solutions that are built with a "you build it/you run it"
DevOps mindset easily morph from pilot to production stages, whereas
quick-and-dirty prototypes end up costing much more in the long run.
Especially in IoT, observability and instrumentation are paramount,
since it is much harder to see what is going on in the field.

Developing IoT solutions right requires a proper blueprint and a
consistent architecture for both cloud and devices, where all aspects of
software craftsmanship and cloud-native software development come into
play. Quality and standardization must be enforced across integrations,
cloud platform, and embedded devices, and these environments should be
treated as a continuum, rather than as separate universes.

Governance ties the other three disciplines together in terms of
architecture, security and compliance, cost control, standardization,
and interoperability. These aspects apply to all elements on an IoT
initiative, ranging from connectivity and gateways all the way up to
data management and advanced visualizations.

**Your IoT journey, powered by Xpirit**

We help clients that have not started on IoT yet, as well as clients
that are already (well) underway on their IoT journey. Whether the
primary driver to start on IoT is to innovate or to catch up with
competition, our North Star Vision and IoT roadmap propositions help
chart viability, establish priority, and build an IoT master plan.
Often, the next step is to do several quick prototyping sprints where we
dive deep, to quickly address challenges and uncertainties. We introduce
aspects of our IoT Reference Architecture to build things first-time
right where appropriate. In parallel, we use our IoT Center of
Excellence blueprint to help you build an organization that can nurture
and grow your IoT initiatives. With those building blocks in place, we
help you move from prototype via pilot to the launch of the Minimum
Viable Product, and beyond.

With customers who are already underway with IoT we usually start with
an IoT assessment, which yields a broad and objective view of the status
quo. Together with selected partners, we look at software, hardware,
data, security, the validity of the underlying business case, and many
more aspects. Depending on the outcome, we bring in the right
propositions to help tackle any challenges we may have uncovered. We aim
to move all four disciplines forward over time but focus where attention
is most needed.

What sets us apart is our ability to deliver according to your needs:
our "us/together/you" approach means we want to empower you and your
teams. Xpirit can quickly boost existing IoT teams with the required
expertise, provide ongoing support and mentoring to teams over a longer
period, or deliver an IoT journey end-to-end for our customers. We are
continuously evolving our portfolio of services and our IoT
accelerators, including an IoT reference architecture and a blueprint
for an IoT center of excellence. We augment our own expertise as needed
with help from our trusted partners, especially where it comes to
hardware, embedded software, and connectivity.

Interested in learning more? Have a cool project to talk about? Want to
work with amazing people on IoT projects? Reach out to IoT CTO Tijmen
van de Kamp (<tvandekamp@xpirit.com>)
