# Exclusive two day workshop:

# Hack Yourself First, how to go on the cyber-offence"

## -- The Workshop 

Cyber-attacks have become a reality of running software on the web
today. We find ourselves under a constant barrage of malicious activity
from hacktivists, online criminals and increasingly, nation states.
Successful attacks from these adversaries are predominantly via flaws in
the software products they target -- flaws that could have been
prevented by developers understanding how online attackers work and what
the appropriate defensive measures are.

 

"Hack Yourself First" is all about building up defensive skills in
developers. It looks at security from the attacker's perspective and
takes them through the steps necessary to exploit vulnerable software on
the web so that they can experience hacking first hand. Workshop
participants are set specific goals they must complete that involve
probing for risks and then exploiting discrete vulnerabilities in a
specially built vulnerable application. The interactive nature of the
workshop means that multiple attack vectors are usually identified
across the spectrum of participants and each person contributes their
own unique perspective as to how specific risks are exploited.

 

## -- Objectives

The objective of the workshop is that each person walks away with
demonstrated experience across a broad spectrum of specific risks. They
not only learn about but also demonstrate practical experience across a
range of different vulnerabilities targeted to the specific needs of the
group. Topics include:

 

1.       SQL injection

2.       Cross site scripting

3.       Cross site request forgery

4.       Clickjacking

5.       Session hijacking

6.       Account enumeration

7.       Transport layer security

8.       API security

9.       Mobile services integration

10.   Brute force attacks

11.   Passwords cracking

12.   Parameter tampering

13.   Attack automation

14.   Dynamic analysis

## -- ![](./media/image1.jpeg)About troy Hunt

Troy Hunt is an Australian Microsoft Most Valuable Professional for
Developer Security and Author for Pluralsight --- a leader in online
training for technology and creative professionals. Troy has been
building software for browsers since the very early days of the web and
possesses an exceptional ability to distil complex subjects into
relatable explanations. This has lead Troy to become an industry thought
leader in the security space and produce many top-rated courses for
Pluralsight. Currently, Troy is heavily involved in Have I been pwned? a
free service that aggregates data breaches and helps people establish
potential impacts from malicious web activity. As the author of the
eBook and series "OWASP Top 10 for .NET Developers", Troy blogs
regularly about web security and is a frequent speaker at industry
conferences and throughout the media to discuss a wide range of
technologies. Aside from technology and security, Troy is an avid
snowboarder, windsurfer, tennis player and regular motor sport
participant.

## -- Intended audience

Any software developer who wants to get a better understanding what is
going on in cyber space if it comes to hacking and cracking of systems.
This workshop enables you to take a pro-active approach and you learn
how hackers will try to break your system. This workshop will be an eye
opener for most developers and it is the starting point of becoming a
better developer. It all starts with awareness and improving your own
habits. So start hacking yourself first, to become a better developer!

## -- Date

Monday June 22th and Tuesday June 23th 2015

## 

## -- Location

Hotel Lapershoek Hilversum, Netherlands

![http://www.cfmedia.vfmleonardo.com/imageRepo/4/0/54/607/168/Lapershoek_Exterior_10_P.jpg](./media/image2.jpeg)


## 

## ![](./media/image3.png)

## 

## -- Price

The costs for this two day exclusive workshop are 1499 Euro Excluding
V.A.T.
