**Mobile Innovation: Don't Wait for the "Perfect" App**

**by Joseph Hill**

*Xamarin Cofounder and Principal Director of Program Management at
Microsoft*

In less than a week, Ninatic's Pokémon Go took Nintendo's popular
franchise into the real world and became the planet\'s most popular app.
By combining with Augmented Reality, location-based services, gestures
and touch mechanics, as well as a cloud-based logic and storage, Niantic
produced a uniquely mobile gaming experience that redefined its category
while collecting record earnings.

**The mobile home run**

Mobile developers everywhere are looking for their Pokémon Go --- that
unique, transformative, \"showstopper\" experience that combines the
best of what mobile devices offer with an untethered use case to create
something entirely new. And they're not as rare as you might think.
While consumer apps like Pokémon Go and Uber get most of the attention,
there are thousands of B2B and B2E apps that are every bit as successful
and innovative. For example, Novarum DX built an app that uses
smartphones and their cameras to process tests that detect the presence
of diseases such as Ebola, or harmful chemicals in water supplies. The
app replaces sophisticated laboratory equipment and requires no
additional hardware, allowing field workers with minimal training to
analyze tests on the spot, bringing life-saving testing to areas that
were previously inaccessible.

While saving lives with a mobile app is an obvious win, not every
business has the right set of circumstances to replicate that kind of
success. But that doesn\'t mean they\'re locked out of the kinds of
digital transformation mobility can bring. In fact, if you\'re only
looking for headline-making apps, you\'re probably missing out on a lot
of immediate innovation right in front of you.

**Incremental transformation**

In the long term, businesses succeed and fail on the thinnest of
margins. Whether you\'re a five-person startup or a Fortune 500
enterprise, reducing costs or increasing productivity by even a fraction
of a percent can make a significant difference in near-term success. And
over time those [incremental efficiencies can add up to something much
bigger]{.mark}.

We see this constantly with customers looking to improve their core
business processes with mobility. These projects may not make headlines,
but the opportunity they represent is substantial. Bloomin' Brands lets
its Outback Steakhouse customers receive coupons, get on the guest list,
and pay for their meals from mobile devices. McKesson helps doctors
replace time-consuming paper forms with electronic records and a mobile
app. Xactware, which processes 80% of U.S. home property claims, created
a mobile app to help insurance adjusters receive assignments, build 3D
models, estimate costs, settle onsite, and instantly upload all
materials for processing while in the field. While these companies may
not have created entirely new businesses, they all built dramatically
more efficient, delightful experiences for their employees and
customers.

**Cultural reinvention**

In most cases, the immediate financial results of a truly mobile
strategy are enough to justify the investment --- happy customers are
profitable customers, and efficient workplaces mean increased
productivity. But there's a secondary benefit, as well. [Mobility is
culturally transformative. It helps executives shift from "How much" to
"What if."]{.mark} It allows IT to add quantifiable value, moving from a
cost center to a profit center. And it helps engage developers who might
otherwise look elsewhere. Recently, a large, traditional healthcare
company launched a small proof-of-concept mobile program with a very
limited budget. As the project succeeded, developer interest from
outside the team soared as the project offered an opportunity to engage
in what the project lead called "the cool new thing we had going on",
without leaving the security of their current company.

**Build fundamentally mobile experiences**

Of course, not every mobile story has a happy ending. You don't have to
look hard to find cautionary tales of mobile apps that failed to
deliver. There are as many reasons for this as there are apps, but the
common thread through most of them is a lack of understanding of the
mobile use case. [If mobility is just a checkbox --- a rehash of your
desktop application crammed into a smaller screen --- the project is
headed for mediocrity or worse, and you'll probably create as many
problems as you'll solve.]{.mark}

Our mobile devices have to be more than just PCs with limited storage,
small screens, and small keyboards. Porting desktop or Web apps (yes ---
even \"responsive\" websites) to those devices plays to the worst of the
platform and ignores the best. By all means, businesses must extend
their systems to mobile endpoints, but they should do so by creating
mobile-first experiences that integrate with existing systems of record.
That means embracing mobile-only features like biometric authentication,
push notifications, voice communication, GPS, and other sensors. It
means offsetting form factor limitations by embracing cloud-based
intelligence services like face recognition and predictive analytics.
And most of all, it means building beautiful, performant native
applications that are every bit as satisfying to users as the latest
consumer apps they downloaded from their app store.

**What's Next**

The scope of mobile development is growing at an astounding rate,
covering as much ground in a month as desktop development did in a year.
In just the 8 years since the launch of the iPhone, we've gone from
email, calendar, and PIM to 3D interfaces, voice-driven controls, and
intelligent services that predict and surface information before you
know you need it. As we continue that journey toward more immersive,
natural interfaces on increasingly diverse types of devices, two trends
will become increasingly important. The first is deeper integration into
operating systems and hardware, to wring maximum performance out of
devices and provide native UI on every platform. The second is an
increasingly intelligent, responsive cloud service that delivers
seamless, modern experiences to the widest possible number of platforms
without sacrificing developer efficiency.

**Act Now**

A lot of interesting technology is on the way, but don't wait to get
started. It's been said that "the perfect is the enemy of the good," and
that's never been more true than today. For every game-changing mobile
pure-play that makes headlines, there are hundreds of companies that
built steady streams of innovation over time, and that all starts with
one app. Then another, and another...
