**The** **epic story of Blinky**

*How an idea born at the lunch table, turns into a handcrafted connected
device, delivered on every colleague\'s doorstep, in only 3,5 weeks.*

[How it started]{.underline}

The story of Blinky started just like many more typical Xpirit stories
did. On Friday, December 3, while having a nice lunch with a bunch of
Xpiriters, someone spoke the magical words: *\"we should do something
creative* *for an end-of-year gift. Something crazy.\"* Now, as you may
know, we use a mantra at Xpirit: Do Epic Shit. It\'s what we do. And we
love that so much, that we have created a logo and t-shirts of it. How
we came up with that mantra is a whole other story by the way. Very much
worth reading, but let\'s focus on the story of Blinky.

While trying to evolve \'something crazy\' into something achievable, we
came up with the idea to create a Christmas version of our Do Epic Shit
t-shirt with actual lights on it. That idea quickly evolved to a big
button at the office, so if someone needed help, they could press the
button and the lights on the t-shirts would blink. After discussing the
possible dangers of electrocution, we decided that it might be best to
do something crazy but safer.

However, we did like the idea of a button at the office that we could
use to call for help and also the use of our Do Epic Shit mantra. And
so, someone said: *\"maybe we could create something, like a bat-signal,
in the form of our Do Epic Shit logo!\"* And there it was, the
conception of Blinky. But what would it look like? What should the
\'thing\' do? And could we manufacture and deliver it before Christmas?
The next few minutes, the wildest ideas flew over the table. We decided
to think about it and involve our creative genius, Olaf Walther, from
Studio OOM.

[The first sketches]{.underline}

![Afbeelding met tekst, whiteboard Automatisch gegenereerde
beschrijving](./media/image1.jpeg)
![Afbeelding met tekst, whiteboard
Automatisch gegenereerde
beschrijving](./media/image2.jpeg)
![Afbeelding met tekst, whiteboard Automatisch
gegenereerde
beschrijving](./media/image3.jpeg)
On December 6, the WhatsApp Group\' Epic Shit 2021\'
was created. We came up with the idea of creating a Christmas package
with a Christmas edition of our t-shirt but without electronics and
creating the Do Epic Shit logo in plexiglass with LED lighting. That
would be our bat signal. On Friday the 10^th^, we brainstormed with Olaf
on how to create all of this, and we came up with the sketches below.

![Afbeelding met licht Automatisch gegenereerde
beschrijving](./media/image4.jpeg)


![](./media/image5.jpg)
Then the idea evolved to creating an *XKea
DIY kit with Swedish instructions.* But, for the sake of quality, we
decided to assemble the device ourselves at the office. We did, however,
like the \'XKEA DIY\' thing, so we thought of a Swedish name for the
device and an XKea instruction manual.

The box in which the device would be delivered would also have to be
epic, of course. So, what would the design of the box look like? Again,
we discussed many ideas, from retro branding to Orwell-style and a
superhero theme. The last one made the link to the bat signal quite
nicely, so we decided to go for that one.

Then the materials we would need to assemble the device. We required [70
MCUs, ...xxxxxx....]{.mark} [Wat nog meer?]{.mark}. And remember, we
wanted to deliver the package before Christmas. We\'re talking December
13 now. Next, we asked ourselves what kind of bat signal we would
create. The first was flashing violently for 10 seconds. Then we came up
with the idea to send *\"epic shit\"* in morse-code as an easter egg.

![Afbeelding met tekst Automatisch gegenereerde
beschrijving](./media/image6.jpg)
On December 14, we all gave an update in
the WhatsApp group about the project\'s status and what was left to do.
We were still in the process of digitalizing the drawings and creating
the device code. Luckily, most of the materials were received, but not
everything. At this point, we had two questions left: what kind of
slogan would we engrave on the foot of the device, and how would we
deliver the packages to our colleagues?

[The machine that goes BLINK]{.underline}

Again, as things often go around here, many slogans were dropped in the
chat. Some excellent examples: *\"Allo Allo Nighthawk, this is London
Calling!\"* Or: *\"In case of epic emergency, this sign will flash!\"*
But the next day, one of our brilliant Xpiriters came up with the
absolute best: *\"The machine that goes blink.\"* If you don\'t know why
this is the best slogan, watch this Monty Python video:
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wd9NQxIeAAc>. After some discussions,
we decided to go with this one. But we also wanted to name the device to
use in our day-to-day conversations. We quickly came up with Blinky. And
finally, on December 16, we had a name, a slogan, and a design for the
box.

On December 17, we still had some challenges. We had not yet decided on
how to deliver the packages. In-person delivery would be more personal,
but it also would be quite a challenge logistically. On the other hand,
how reliable would the courier services be around Christmas? Next to
that, still not all the materials were delivered. We also didn\'t have a
date to assemble all the devices, and finally, we had to write
instructions so everyone could connect Blinky to their wifi. There was
also some good news; although the morse code didn\'t work yet, the
connectivity and colors per device did work.

[Powered by log4j]{.underline}

Being a cloud consultancy company, we have some colleagues who are very
keen on security. So, Marcel dropped a remark: *\"If we want to connect
the devices to the personal wifi of our colleagues, some of them will*
*for sure* *have questions about safety. How are we going to handle
this?\"* That was a good question. We thought about a disclaimer, but
then Matthijs came up with a genius idea: *\"Updates will be deployed
remotely via log4j.\"* *(if you* *don\'t* *know about the log4j hack,
read this blog post by Jesse Houwing).* We all agreed this was genius,
so that\'s how \"powered by log4j\" ended up at the box.

[Assembling [70]{.mark} Blinkies]{.underline}

Although we still didn\'t have the cables, on December 19, we agreed
that we would assemble the devices on December 22. But there was a lot
of work to be done before we could start building. During the night of
Sunday, December 19 to Monday, December 20, around 3:14, Olaf showed us
what his workbench looked like after many hours of milling![Afbeelding
met binnen, rommelig Automatisch gegenereerde
beschrijving](./media/image7.jpg)
 (Thanks, Olaf!). But the job was almost
done. On December 20, we decided to deliver the devices to our
colleagues\' doorstep by courier.

Then, on December 22, it was D-day. We wanted to assemble the devices at
the office. Therefore, we had to wait until the evening so the office
would be empty because we wanted to keep it a surprise. After some
delicious pizza, we started assembling. We divided the tasks and started
working. As you can imagine, the joy was great when the first Blinky
morse signals blinked.

![Afbeelding met toonbank, versierd Automatisch gegenereerde
beschrijving](./media/image8.jpeg)
Around 11:30 PM, every device was
assembled, and we carefully cleaned up the evidence.

[Delivery and sending messages in morse]{.underline}

On December 27, the first Blinkies were delivered. After the first
delivery, the Xpirit WhatsApp group exploded. The colleagues who
received it were very excited but didn\'t post any spoilers; other than
that, an epic gift was on the way. Every time a Blinky was received,
there was an enthusiastic reaction in the group. And so, Chris changed
the subject of the WhatsApp group to *has* *your package already been*
*delivered.* After sending the first message (which was pretty simple,
just 'Blinky') through morse-code, the group exploded again. Everyone
was as busy figuring out how to decode the message. Most of the
Xpiriters figured it out pretty ![Afbeelding met tekst, huiskat, kat,
nachthemel Automatisch gegenereerde
beschrijving](./media/image9.jpg)
![](./media/image10.jpg)
quickly. During the next week, we sent a message each
day like, 'take me places', 'feed me', 'I'm tired', and ![Afbeelding met
tekst, tafel, binnen, computer Automatisch gegenereerde
beschrijving](./media/image11.jpeg)
'why am I here'. This resulted in some
nice pictures that were dropped in the group.

![Afbeelding met tekst, bord Automatisch gegenereerde
beschrijving](./media/image12.jpg)


The last scheduled message was sent on New Year\'s Eve: Happy new year!

*That was the story of Blinky. In 3,5 weeks, an idea, born at the lunch
table, evolved from a lighting t-shirt to a connected device, all
handcrafted by Xpiriters and, of course, Olaf.* *It\'s typical of
Xpirit;* *that\'s* *how things often go. We start with an idea and take
it a few levels higher. We want to thank every Xpiriter who has
contributed to Blinky* *and Olaf Walther from Studio OOM, and we are
looking forward to doing more Epic Shit together.*
