## Intro Magazine 18
It was 2015. I just entered the Xebia office as a freshman. The company was founded 3 months before, and the 6 others and I as a new joiner were gathering for our weekly knowledge sharing session on Tuesday. “What are we going to do?” was the question we asked each other. 

“Techdays is coming up, and we have tons of sessions to present, so let’s prepare that” said one. But that is not what we wanted, we wanted to make more impact than that. As a new kid on the block in the Dutch Microsoft market, we wanted more. One of my colleagues suggested:” Shall we make an old-fashioned magazine?. With all the content being online, this is maybe a refreshing thing to do!”. “And then hand them out to all 3000 attendees of the conference in their goodie bag!”, said another. “Yeah, and then we write articles about the sessions we do, so people have some background information, or are triggered to come to our sessions”. And soon enough this came to fruition. With only 3 weeks to go before the event, we wrote the articles, designed the magazine, found a party that could do the lay-out, went to press and printed 5000 copies of the magazine. XPRT magazine No 1 was born. The night before the event we went to the venue with the whole crew to put the magazines in the goodie bags. At 3.30 AM we were done! Tired, but very proud, we went home for a few hours of sleep before delivering our sessions the next day!

That was the start of our magazine. Fast forward 10 years to this new shiny gold edition. Magazine 18. An anniversary edition in 2 parts, of which this is part one! A lot of things have changed. Compared to the first magazine we changed quite a bit in lay-out, photo’s and graphic design. For a nice overview of covers, look at the article around 10 years of knowledge sharing to see the evolution of our Magazine, but also of our company’s learning with knowledge sharing over the last 10 years. Although many things have changed over years one thing remains the same. The pure and honest, deep content of our own people. Not only from the Netherlands but from our company worldwide. The power of XPRT magazine is to be always from the hearts and minds of the people. They write about things they like! Things that they work with, figured out on one of our innovation days or about hobby projects in their spare time. But always with a focus on technology, and always on the bleeding edge of the next evolutionary wave. 

This magazine’s edition is not different in that respect. Again, we have articles talking about the next thing. Of course we are also heavily focused on AI. Randy Pagels has 2 articles to make better use of GitHub Copilot and how to improve your prompting to make better use of it and get better output. Thomas Tomow looks at the next evolution of A. Agents. He guides us through building an AI agent using Semantic Kernel, highlighting the shift from rule-based to learning-based and generative AI approaches. Jonathan David also uses tools like Semantic Kernel and OmniParser, and his article provides technical insights into using AI for compliance with accessibility standards. And that is not the only thing AI can do. It can be used for so much more. Olena Borzenko explores the concept of “Generative Chaos” and uses AI to generate pieces of art.

But there is more than AI. There is still a lot going on in the infrastructure world as well. Erwin Staal discusses the evolution from traditional Infrastructure as Code (IaC) to “Infrastructure from Code,” where infrastructure is generated directly from application logic. Emanuele Bartolesi introduces .NET Aspire, a Microsoft stack for building cloud-native applications and provides a step-by-step guide to getting started with it.

As always, we have security in high regard. Wesley Cabus explains the differences between opaque tokens and JWTs for API authentication and authorization and Michael van Rooijen wrote about how to securely deploy applications to Azure using Octopus Deploy and Entra Workload Identity

And still, this is not all. Evolution does not only happen in technology. We also evolve in the way we run our projects. Andreas Giesa describes Xebia’s approach to engagement management, focusing on delivering sustainable value in digital transformation projects and introduces the Xebia Engagement Management Framework. 

I think we did it again. This new anniversary edition is packed with new technology and insights that are on the edge of innovation, I truly hope you enjoy the magazine and make sure you share this knowledge with others!
 
