# Growing your DevOps mindset

Rene van Osnabrugge and Martijn van der Sijde

Hi, I am John. As technical lead within my company, I am responsible for
making the right technical choices that should be implemented by all our
development teams. One of the main goals of our senior management is to
ensure that our solutions will be of higher quality. Two years ago, we
had two production outages and a security breach, which has cost the
company a lot of money. Afterwards, it appeared that this was caused by
some major flaws in the software design and implementation that did not
follow the architectural guidelines. As a solution, I have written a new
software architecture document with rules and guidelines to which the
teams need to comply.

It came to my attention that not all teams want to comply because they
do not agree with my approach and have not been involved. The thing is
that we have always worked like this in our company and I think
management wants it to be done in this way. I can't change anything
about it.

The teams do not want to write good software, so I have to check
everything myself. The problem is that I don't have the time to monitor
all teams to check off the guidelines that I have given them. It is
really necessary because obviously, the teams don't have the required
knowledge. Given the chance, they will work around my plans, because
they don't see the added value (talking about a lack of knowledge\...).
They have asked me to help them out with some issues, but I don't
understand why I should and why it is all so difficult. I could do it
myself, but that is not my job. Besides, as I said, I don't have the
time for it. Then, one of our more experienced guys offered to help
**me** out. Very nice of him, but what's in it for me? It will probably
also take ages to get him up to speed, assuming that this can be done.

During some of the discussions, the teams told me about DevOps and how
that could help me solve some of my problems. I don't know a lot about
it, but it seems that it requires a lot of effort to achieve the same
thing. I also think it's a hype that's not worth investing time in
because it will not give us the benefits we hope for. Besides that, I
can't go to management and propose these kinds of changes. If they want
me to change the company, they would have made me a manager instead of a
technical lead. Oops, looking at the time, sorry, I have to leave you
and run to my next meeting now.

# Fear and Mindset

That was John. And we bet it sounds slightly familiar. But what is he
actually saying, and why? To understand that, it is important to gain a
little more understanding of how someone thinks and acts. No, you don't
have to be a psychologist with deep insights into human behavior, but
some basic understanding would greatly benefit our goal of growing a
DevOps mindset.

**Fears**

The first thing that should be realized is that not everyone is as open,
transparent and cooperative as we would like them to be. In many cases,
this can be traced back to a primary human emotion: fear. In our modern
time, fear is a strong motivator to do the wrong things. In dangerous
situations, fear is a good thing. It helps us to stay focused and gives
us "superpowers", but in a normal work-related surrounding, fear is
poison. If you can't relax, trust people, be open and transparent, your
behavior changes and with your behavior, the behavior of others as well.

There are a number of different fears[^1] that can be recognized:

-   The fear of losing your job

-   The fear of being embarrassed

-   The fear of feeling inferior

![](./media/image1.gif)
The question to answer is: why do people
have these fears and how do these fears reflect in their behavior? This
really touches on psychology and how we as humans behave in different
situations. For example, when you take a good look at Maslow's Hierarchy
of Needs[^2] and map these fears to this hierarchy, it starts to make
sense.

Maslow described the human needs in his five-stage model. The phases
describe what motivates us to grow. When a phase is met, you grow to the
next phase to eventually end up in the fifth phase. Within the first
four phases we are motivated because our needs are unmet. And the longer
it takes to meet them, the more motivated we become. When the need is
met, the motivation decreases. The fifth phase works the other way
around. The fifth phase describes a longing for growth or fulfilled
being. It is hard to get into the fifth phase, because progress is often
disrupted by a failure to meet lower level needs. And quite often the
failure is coming from within, caused by actions based on fear.

A job is, on many occasions, a direct implementation of the first phase.
It provides food, drinks and shelter. Fear of losing your job is exposed
in many ways. People that keep their opinion to themselves, or people
who just do what they are told to do, regardless of whether they agree.
But also people who deliberately block others in doing the right thing,
because it might do them harm. Egocentric behavior can also be caused by
this fear.

Another element is that nobody wants to be alone. Humans are social
beings. We want to belong to a group. This starts when we are kids. It
doesn't matter whether we want to belong to the popular, the alternative
or the geeks, but we want to belong. If we belong to a group, we do not
want to be kicked out. If we say the wrong things or propose a strange
solution, what might they think? Will we still belong? These examples
refer to the fear of feeling embarrassed and the opinion of others.

When we climb up to the fourth phase, esteem, the behavior starts to
shift towards status, respect and recognition. Once there, the fear of
feeling inferior is looming. Doing things that do not fit our status
might harm us. For example, a CEO might think that cleaning out the
dishwasher or helping out to install a new PC is not appropriate.

While the Maslow hierarchy describes real human needs and the fears
describe the protective behavior that comes with it, the question should
be asked whether the behavior that people expose contributes to
achieving a company's goals. In our modern society with educated
generations, the exposed behavior is usually not the way to fight the
fear. So why are people behaving the way they do, even it is not
constructive?

**Fixed and Growth Mindset**

In 2006 the psychologist Carol Dweck published a book called "Mindset",
which covered decades of research on achievement and success. Dweck
describes two types of mindset a person can have and what influence this
has on their behavior: a fixed mindset or a growth mindset.

![](./media/image2.png)[^3]

In a fixed mindset, people believe their basic qualities, like their
intelligence or talent, are simply fixed traits. They spend their time
documenting their intelligence or talent instead of developing them.
They also believe that talent alone creates success, without effort.

In a growth mindset, people believe that their most basic abilities can
be developed through dedication and hard work. Brains and talent are
just the starting point. This view creates a love of learning and a
resilience that is essential for great accomplishment. [^4]

# The story of John and theoretic insights combined

Chances are that John will not achieve the goals he intends to. Knowing
the theoretic explanation of mindset and fears, let's see what is
preventing John from being successful. A few fears and a clearly fixed
mindset are preventing this.

John regards the success of others, though it could contribute to his
goals, as a threat instead of an opportunity. The leadership and courage
that his colleague is displaying by offering to help out, isn't
appreciated, which will prevent people from acting like this in the
future. He regards any effort in trying a different approach, DevOps in
this case, as fruitless upfront. In addition, he looks at the teams as
being incapable of doing their jobs instead of seeing room for them to
adapt and learn, based on shared goals. These are all symptoms of a
fixed mindset. His focus is on looking smart instead of the desire to
learn. A continuous improvement mindset isn't stimulated.

Having the teams look up to him as an authority to get his plans done
seems important to him. Admitting that he doesn't know a lot about the
proposed improvements is not an option. His fear is that he will be
embarrassed by the fact that he himself also has a lack of knowledge in
a certain area. He is also refusing to help them out for the same reason
and also because he might think of it as something that is below his
stature. Saying that it is not his job could be his fear of doing
something that he regards as inferior to his responsibilities.

The result is that there is no open discussion about what can be
improved together with the teams at all. Looking at his approach to
achieve his goals, he is accepting the status quo. He thinks that
management wants it done in this way, so he can't change anything about
it. The point is that he doesn't know for sure and he avoids having a
conversation with management and the teams about it. Moreover, the fear
of losing his job also contributes to not proposing any changes.

# How is this related to DevOps?

Everything that we described above is generic. It can be applied to any
person in basically any situation, so what relation do these fears and
mindset have with DevOps?

When an organization wants to make the transformation to a DevOps
organization, the first things that come to mind are technology-based:
create pipelines, automate scripts, bring people together, monitor etc.
But only implementing the technology and putting people in the same room
is not a guarantee for success.

DevOps is also enforcing a huge change to people. People will have to do
other jobs than they were used to. They need to work with people they
have never worked with before. They have to learn new technology and
adopt new practices. And in many cases, they will lose their current job
to be replaced by another, totally different, one. The natural
resistance to these changes has everything to do with mindset and fears.

For a successful DevOps transformation, we need to give a lot of
attention to this aspect. How do we help people to make the shift? The
first step is to start nurturing a Growth Mindset. We can do this by
praising behavior instead of results. Encourage learning from both
success and failures and focus on improvement instead of blame.

Organizations and their management play a big part in this by creating a
safe environment for people to practice this. When people feel safe and
do not fear for their jobs, they can move on to the next phase of
overcoming the fear of embarrassment. By stimulating people to just ask
questions if they do not understand, even it feels like a dumb question,
or make suggestions on things that are usually out of your league, they
start to notice that their fear of embarrassment is not realistic.
Usually, others praise you for raising a question or making a suggestion
that others can build on. You need to ask a lot of questions and make a
lot of suggestions to put things in motion.

People who work in a group should treat each other as equal even if they
are not in the same organizational hierarchy. Reward people for doing
the work that should be done, even it is not in their job description,
focus on the greater good and team goals instead of individual goals.
This also will gain them respect and status, albeit in another sense.

**Conclusion**

When looking back at John's introduction and his reasoning, it is clear
that John could be more successful. His fears and mindset play an
important role in his chance for success. And it does not only affect
him, it affects others as well. When implementing DevOps, consider that,
besides all the great automation and technology, people are involved and
need to be on board in order to make it work. Technology is not enough.
It is using the technology that makes the difference. This is why
growing a DevOps Mindset without fear is key to your success!

[^1]: Based on the book Getting Naked: A Business Fable About Shedding
    The Three Fears That Sabotage Client Loyalty, Patrick Lencioni

[^2]: <https://www.simplypsychology.org/maslow.html>

[^3]: <http://blog.mindsetworks.com/entry/growth-mindset-for-a-more-empathetic-and-collaborative-world>

[^4]: <https://mindsetonline.com/whatisit/about/>
