## Introduction XPRT Magazine 14

As Bono chants in the U2 song Vertigo: Unos, dos, tres, catorce! This is
now also true for this brand new magazine, XPRT Magazine 14! We have
come a long way since our first magazine in 2015. We went through
various major and minor rebranding. And this is also true in this
edition. You will see some major visual and structural changes to our
magazine. This not only reflects our push for continuous improvement,
but also reflects our own transformation at Xpirit. Although we have
always been a proud part of Xebia, we recently transitioned from Xpirit
to Xebia \| Xpirit. This move represents a significant evolution in our
organization\'s capabilities and scope, allowing us to offer a broader
range of services to our clients and take on even more complex and
challenging projects.

But no worries, our commitment to thought leadership and continuous
improvement stays the same. We remain passionate about exploring new
ideas, challenging ourselves and our clients, and finding innovative
solutions to the most pressing challenges facing businesses today. So,
as I hold this brand new XPRT magazine in my hands, I can't help but
feel a sense of pride and excitement.

We did it again! As I read through these articles, I\'m struck by the
depth of knowledge and expertise our engineers and thought leaders
possess. And I'm reminded once again of how fortunate we are to work in
an organization that values thought leadership, innovation, and
continuous improvement

Twice a year, this magazine showcases the expertise and insights of our
engineers and thought leaders, providing you, our readers, with
practical advice and new ways of thinking about complex challenges. In
this edition, we again gathered a broad range of articles, tackling
everything from digital transformations to identity access management,
from load testing to zero trust security models.

In this edition, we explore the latest tools and techniques for
enhancing your software development practices. We look at how to add
load testing to your CI/CD workflows by using Azure Load Test and GitHub
Actions, examine why digital transformations often fail, and provide
insights into how to upgrade your app to the future by migrating from
WPF or Winforms to Blazor.

We also delve into the world of identity access management. We explore
some of the key topics related to identity management on the Azure
platform, including how to mock OpenID Connect Providers for testing,
how to use Azure AD Access Packages to manage access permissions, and
how to implement OAuth2 device flow-proxy using free Azure components.
We also delve into the topic of zero trust security, examining how this
approach can help organizations protect their data and systems from
increasingly sophisticated threats. Finally, we explore ways to prevent
identity crises in Azure, providing practical guidance on how to manage
identity-related risks and ensure the integrity and security of your
Azure-based applications and services.

And it would not be a XPRT magazine if we did not cover some
cutting-edge software development topics, including EF Extensions and
mutation testing in C#. We even take a playful look at whether ChatGPT
is a better developer than you, showcasing the latest capabilities in AI
and machine learning.

By organizing these topics under our 8 pillars of an engineering
culture, we\'re making it clear that there is a lot of ground to be
covered if you want to act like a software company. Much like the song
Vertigo, which is known for its high energy and driving rhythm, XPRT
magazine is designed to inspire and energize you to drive this
transformation forward.

We hope this edition of XPRT magazine inspires you to explore new ideas,
challenge yourself and your team, and take your Engineering Culture to
the next level.
