The future of IT

Twenty-five years ago, when I started my career in the IT industry, I
built software using the programming language C++. Testing was done
manually, and the way we distributed our software was on one or,
occasionally, multiple floppy disks. To obtain new versions of the
software you used, you made a payment to a bank account of the company
you wanted the software from, and they returned an envelope with the
disks included. Back then, the primary change factor in software was
driven by business demand. Users wanted new things with your software,
and that was what you build. Software was built withing the constraints
and pace of the change factors, distribution mechanisms, and the
hardware that was available at the time.

Nowadays the change factors for your software does not only come from
your end-users anymore. Although your user does not require a change,
there are many other factors that do require a change to your software.
For example;

You need to make changes because the components you used to build it,
have a new version (every week..).\
The framework you used to build your application has become obsolete.
Reason: there is a new framework that is much cooler and the whole
community has moved to the other framework, leaving you with legacy if
you don't change.\
The way you distribute your software has changed to a Software as a
Service model, leaving you to make sure the software does not only
compile but also that it runs on the hardware you get from your cloud
provider and last but not least to provide has 24x7 support. And this is
the best-case scenario where a company already made the step forward to
leverage the capabilities provided by the cloud and to deliver their
software as a service and not as a boxed product.

Now, what is the future of IT? Confucius said: "you need to study the
past to divine the future". So what has changed our industry in the
past? What are the things we need to look out for that will impact the
way we write and maintain software. Software is eating the world. Even
the most simple coffee machine these days has software built into it, to
make a perfect cup. Software is everywhere, but the ways we build
software has not significantly changed. We still write in a programming
language, produce some form of machine code, and that gets moved to the
device that needs to run the software.

Personally I think you should not ask a 45+-year-old guy like me where
the future will go to. I think the real future of digital will be
created and supported by our new generation of employees that are full
digital natives. Since we, as old people, try to move old concepts into
a new modernized world, we need to count on these new thinkers. Radical
change comes from radically different perspectives and a way of thinking
that is unbounded to what you already know.

What I do know is that change is the only constant, and we need a way to
cope with all this change. This is a challenge that is universal and
hard to grab. It has to do with the ability of us human beings to cope
with change and embrace it instead of fighting it all the time. It is in
our nature to fight change. It is the reason we stay too long with a
partner we already dislike for years before we face the brutal fact, we
don't love each other anymore. It is the reason we hold on to the iPhone
because we are so used to its way of work, not because it is the best
device available. It is the fear of tempory delay, the fear we need to
change our habit,s that withhold us to try something new. That is the
reason innovations have such a large failure rate. If they don't provide
us convenience or more time to do something else, we don't invest in
learning it.

So if you ask me what the future of IT is, then it is mostly the need
for people to embrace change. We need to change the way we work, the way
we organize ourselves, the way we anticipate change. We need to
understand the fact that everything we learned in IT for the past
decades is often more a burden than a qualifier to be successful in an
ever-changing world. The companies that have the best ability to embrace
the change, face the facts of its implications, and implementing the
change fast, will be the companies that will win.

At Xpirit, we have a special breath of people, that constantly search
for the change, learn how to apply this, and embrace the fact this means
they need to learn things over and over again. We search for the
possible, not the impossible. We embrace the fact we sometimes fail as
the moment we learned that we share so we learn as a collective. We
celebrate change, we embrace that we know every human being fears the
change, but it is the thing that will bring us forward. Only by
embracing change, we can bring the energy to create the future now.
