Welcome to Xpirit's magazine #3.

Time is passing at the speed of light, and the good news is: at Xpirit
we're ahead of time. While our company is soon celebrating its second
birthday, our team of professionals is boasting a collective experience
of decades. Experience that is based on the interesting and challenging
projects we're involved in, and that reaches out to the forefront of
market developments. Experience that we'd like to share with you. In
workshops, in team meetings, during events, and last but not least, in
this magazine.

This third edition of our magazine once again shows our close
collaboration with Microsoft and naturally you'll find a lot of
information on the role of Microsoft's Visual Studio Team Services, Team
Foundation Server, the MS Bot Framework, the use of Containers on the
Azure platform, as well as Azure Machine Learning. Because time is a key
factor in your success, we're paying special attention to how you can
apply your tooling in implementing continuous delivery and testing. In
fact, we've entered the age of Continuous Delivery 3.0.

As Microsoft's Joseph Hill explains in his article: you can't wait for
the perfect app. There's thousands of companies out there that started
out with apps that appeared to be marginal, and then evolved into huge
success stories. And as for making your app perfect before launching it,
there's an article on embedding testing activities in the development
pipeline. Early and ongoing, continuous testing allows you to reduce
time to market and outpace your competitors. At the same time you make
sure that your app is free of bugs and faults that could lose you
customers. For that matter, feature toggles can be a valuable aspect of
testing, and that's why you'll find a number of articles covering
feature toggles.

The development pipeline is also covered in terms of Infrastructure as
Code, the MS build and release engine, and the separation of deploy and
release. This separation makes business more independent of the IT
department when it comes to releasing functionality to end-users. Our
focus is on the optimization of the development pipeline with the latest
methods and tools, but we've also taken a brief look at how you can
optimize your choices using big data, how you can avoid being held back
by history, and how you can reduce technical debt in order to minimize
risks and achieve greater results.

Please enjoy and benefit from this issue. If you prefer the digital
version of this magazine, please visit our website at:
<http://xpirit.com/magazine>.

Pascal Greuter

Managing Director Xpirit
