Never stop learning -- Thoughts after four years with our epic team

On New Year's Eve, I raised a glass (the last one for January) on four
fantastic years at Xpirit. On a regular basis, I validate what I\'m
doing, both personal and professional. There\'s definitely going to be a
five-year celebration. My job gets a solid 10 out of 10. Actually, the
only situation that could make me hesitate would be the F1 Red Bull team
offering me the same job. It\'s been an amazing journey, and since one
of our values is "Sharing Knowledge", I feel the urge to finally
contribute to our magazine some of the learnings that surprised me the
most: my imposter syndrome, another perspective on IT for many
organizations, and our BHAG ([Big Hairy
AudaciousÂ Goal](https://www.rhythmsystems.com/blog/bid/152192/Classic-BHAG-Examples)
-- a goal you'll set to give direction, but probably won't ever actually
make -- 'Built to Last' from Kim Collins)

You could wonder why it took so long, especially since I\'m the one
helping new colleagues to overcome their imposter syndrome. Every new
colleague is a bit overwhelmed by the Xpirit crew and what we\'ve
achieved so far. If you add a culture in which we continuously help each
other by focusing on what we can still improve, that sometimes can
become a bit scary. The suggestions come from a good heart, and everyone
can make a mistake, but still.. \'Out of our Xpirit-sight\' I started
coaching computer science students from a university on Agile and Growth
Mindset. I even gave three guest presentations at the university of
Utrecht, but never dared to do a dry run for the group. Asking for
Xpirit-feedback during a dry-run is also one of the things I try to
motivate new colleagues for.

Arjan and Rob, especially, helped me (without knowing) to take this
step. Arjan kept asking me for an article for the magazine and was
persistent. Rob motivated me by what he did: a gazillion blogs and
presentations since he joined Xpirit, a month after I did. He described
overcoming his fear in a recent blog post. Rob describes his journey in
overcoming his imposter syndrome and he\'s doing a great job. In a few
years, he has grown to become a respected source of information for many
people on DevOps and GitHub. He gives real meaning to "Sharing
Knowledge". And together with Rob, there are many colleagues that share
our knowledge. This time, I\'m finally joining them in our awesome
magazine.

I guess the imposter syndrome naturally comes when you join a great
team, and you don\'t have a big ego. It is uncomfortable to break the
barriers of your own imprints, but sharing knowledge is incredibly
motivating and gives an enormous amount of positive energy. And, you
will probably learn something new in return. An open mindset helps to be
receptive to the learning part. The open mindset should also help you
ask for some help if you get stuck. Really, it's ok that you don't know
everything.

Another thing that gave an inspiring epiphany was reading \'*Seat at the
Table*\' by Mark Schwartz. The book describes the C-level perspective on
IT. For most domains, for example Marketing, a budget should lead to a
maximum result. Adding budget should hopefully provide more results.
During many conversations with customers, I experienced what the book
describes: a C-level looks at IT in the same way. We purchase solutions
that should lead to a certain result or service. This is true, but only
half of it. It is true, IT-solutions are most often purchased or built
to achieve a certain goal. But as soon as it\'s in production, it must
be maintained. Mandatory maintenance to mitigate new risks. In general,
if you don\'t maintain software, it will get "bit rot": vulnerabilities
or hacks that will jeopardize the stability and reliability of the
solution. From a risk point of view, IT-budget should be addressed as
budget to prevent catastrophes. You can spend a limitless budget on IT,
but the question is the other way around: what risk are you willing to
take, and how much budget is needed to mitigate the risks you\'re not
willing to take. This is one of the reasons why IT budget may feel
unpredictable at times; you never know what new threats arise.

The last topic I would like to address is our main theme for the
upcoming period: Creating Engineering Cultures for our Customer. Here is
my two cents on why and how C-Level should embrace this.

IT keeps innovating at incredible pace and most companies are highly
dependent on IT. By now, you could argue most companies are mainly
IT-driven. Changes used to take years and it was fine to take years to
adjust. However, the current IT landscape changes daily, with regular
updates in the cloud, and newly added open-source possibilities, but
also with new vulnerabilities and threats. To keep up, your IT
colleagues are like the true Avengers, continuously saving the world and
your company from destruction. Yes, by spending time and money, but
there is not only a downside to this; there is a great opportunity if
your company wants to become a great IT employer. How? Here are some
ingredients:

*People First*: everything starts with your colleagues. Give them trust
and autonomy; they know what they are doing. If you take good care of
them, they will take care of you, taking into account what\'s important
for your company. Put people at the beginning of everything you do.
Happy colleagues will lead to a happy business and happy customers.

To make sure your IT colleagues know what they are doing: *facilitate
continuous learning*. IT won\'t stop evolving, and your people must stay
on par with what\'s going on. Attending conferences and meeting peers
will help them do a better job. Yes, education and seminars cost money,
but the learnings are priceless compared with what may happen if your
company has a security breach.

As C-level you should understand and truly *adopt an Agile mindset*.
Agility is mandatory if you want to keep up with the ever-changing IT
world, but Agile is not an IT-trick (nor is it the solution to
everything). C-level has to blend in: for instance, by celebrating
successes but also showing an open mindset when mistakes are made. Learn
and move forward. (don\'t create a procedure to prevent the same
mistake.). Agile is a company way of working, not an IT one.

These are some of the aspects for empowering your IT-crew and creating
and truly adopting an engineering culture that will help your company to
attract and keep top talent. Follow Xpirit and my colleagues on LinkedIn
to find out more about the topic.

Inspired by a lot of inspiring conversations and some recommended
reading: Seat at the table / Time to Think / Getting Naked.
