# Introduction magazine 15

"Fall is the season where nature graciously shares its wisdom, shedding old leaves to make way for new growth". It is October again, and that means a new XPRT magazine. And as this quote nicely describes, this magazine is again full of new knowledge that allows further growth. The quote, generated by ChatGPT is a good example of how our daily lives are already impacted by AI. At Xpirit, we use AI daily to be more creative and productive. But as with everything, great power comes with great responsibility. There are many risks, and we strive for a responsible use of AI. But, to be very honest, we think it is awesome. To show how AI can help us be creative, Matthijs wrote an article about how AI helps him create a fit-for-purpose meditation every day. Of course, there is more than AI, and in this magazine, we show there is also a lot of other content to share.

In this very international magazine, with articles from Xpirit US, Xpirit Belgium, Xpirit Germany, Xpirit Netherlands, and a guest writer, we again share a variety of knowledge that allows you to grow. As usual, we use our engineering culture pillars to logically group the articles. State of the Art Software Engineering has always been an important topic within Xpirit. And in this magazine, we share again a broad scope of articles. Although testing might have moved to the background, it is more important than ever. You will find two articles that revolve around testing. Kristoff writes about "Testing with Playwright", a UI Testing framework and Michael wrote a follow-up on his mutation testing article (#magazine 14) about Fuzzing, meaning that you supply a program with invalid, random, or unexpected input until it encounters a crash.

Danny dives into yet another "Ops". GreenOps. GreenOps is all about sustainable software engineering, and we will show you how you can get started with that. And because you might want to start building this out within your own company, Jasper and Arjan wrote an article about InnerSource. So check this out and try some of the suggestions depicted.

Then, in our Smooth Delivery pillar, Erwin talks about Azure Deployment Environments. A new offering that allows dev teams to spin up infrastructure in the cloud easily. In the Power through Platform pillar, Patrick talks about how Azure Policy can help you to be more compliant, and Olena writes about securing the Azure Service Bus.

We also have some articles for you that are less technical but equally valuable. Heidi writes about the value of value stream mapping, enabling you to clarify your digital vision. 

We are also proud of our guest writer, Colin Dembovski, who shares his DevOpsologist journey. A journey, from South-Africa to the US, where he now works for GitHub. From the more practical side of Sharing knowledge, Thiago shares some secrets to ace the CKAD (Certified Kubernetes Application Developer) exam.

Lastly, Dennis and Thijs have authored an article highlighting the creation of the Techorama booth, a remarkable IoT-enabled Escape room that visitors can experience. This serves as a testament to the innovation and technical prowess fostered within our Engineering Culture Epic Workplace, where our team members' freedom, autonomy, and brilliance drive such accomplishments.

I think we again succeeded in creating a diverse magazine with articles that cover a wide variety of knowledge and underpin our mission. Being an authority in the field! Enjoy!

