# Together we build an Engineering Culture 

At Xpirit, we believe every company is an IT company, no matter what
product or service it provides. Today, no company can make, deliver, or
market its product efficiently without IT technology. Whether it is
banks, insurance companies, logistics companies, or retailers, IT and
software are critical to their success. Many companies embrace this
fact, and are insourcing software developers to be better, faster, and
cheaper. They understand when they adopt new technology and implement it
successfully, they gain a stronger foothold on the market. Companies
that wait for a second or third wave stay at the back of the pack and
will have a very hard time to become a leader in their market.

Since our start in 2014 this is the premise we have worked from. Helping
companies to become an IT company. We have always done that by
leveraging the potential and knowledge of our people., each one from
within their own area of expertise. And together, we drive change at
customers by introducing concepts that are part of an Engineering
Culture.

And this change is pursued in multiple areas, because we believe you
cannot be successful if you focus on 1 area alone. It is not enough to
write good software, build a great cloud foundation, have a nice
workplace, or automate everything. It is everything, together, that will
make you great. Not only in the development teams but also at the
leadership level.

We call this combined set of capabilities and behaviors a company should
have "an Engineering Culture". To be an IT company, you need to act and
behave like an IT company. And everything we do as Xpirit adds to this
vision. This Engineering Culture can be seen from many different
perspectives that we categorize in a number of distinct pillars that
together will help you become successful and can be used to drive
change.

One of the pillars is "**State of the art software engineering**". In
this magazine, we talk about the latest innovation in software
development and the Azure cloud platform and talk about the use of IoT,
Azure Container Apps, and Web Assembly.

We also cover the "ops" side of development. Although Infrastructure as
Code is already becoming the new normal, there is still a lot to be
discovered and learned about it. In this edition, we will cover Bicep
and ARM and how these can help you to speed up your delivery of
infrastructure in the cloud.

Another pillar is "**Smooth Delivery"**. This has been our bread and
butter since we started Xpirit. This is crucial to be successful as an
IT company and therefore part of an Engineering Culture. We talk about
the development toolchain and supply chain, that has become the
heartbeat of product delivery, and an attack vector if you look at
security. We also explore how you can lower the barrier of entry in a
product development team with the use of Codespaces, that is introduced
by GitHub as a means to improve the developer experience. As an early
adopter we worked with this technology for quite a while and we can
share what we have learned so you can speed your adoption of this new
feature..

With the increase of automation and the fact cyber criminals are
adopting the cloud and DevOps practices faster than the average
enterprise, we see an increase in the number of threads we need to deal
with as an industry. Business Continuity, Reliability, and Security is
essential. We cover these topics in our Engineering Culture pillar
**"Appropriate continuity"**. We want to be "secure and compliant by
default", while increasing your speed of delivery and the stability of
the products you deliver. In this magazine you'll find an article that
can help you prepare for a security assessment and we introduce you to
the concept of Chaos Engineering to validate all the hypotheses you make
during the development of your applications and infrastructure.

The fourth pillar we'll touch upon in this magazine is **"Epic Work
Environment"**. Does your culture match your ambition to become an IT
company? DevOps is all about People, Process and Tools, so we also cover
a lot of the cultural aspects that come with becoming an IT company. A
new approach to knowledge sharing and a learning mindset. Because every
profession changes over time. Including ours.

This magazine is a reflection of the wide spread of knowledge that is
present at Xpirit. We love to share our knowledge throughout this
magazine and this is also part of our own internal Engineering Culture
under a fifth pillar **"Knowledge Driven"**. You might already have seen
that we are expanding in Europe. We introduce Xpirit Germany that will
help drive change at companies in Germany, and we broadened our
capabilities into the IoT business.

Last but not least, you can read about how platforms can help you to
accelerate your business. You can read about how the implementation of a
self-service cloud portal helped Maersk to effectively respond to the
log4j vulnerability, and we talk a bit about how you can use the Azure
IoT platform and how to migrate your AKS workloads to Azure Container
Apps. These articles are part of the sixth pillar **"Power Through
Platforms"**.

We hope you enjoy this magazine and would like to challenge you to take
a step back and look at your own company. Are you an IT company? And
what do you need to build your own Engineering Culture?

![](./media/image1.png)

