# Communities to enable endless possibilities

**Last year, Linux OS celebrated its 25^th^ anniversary. In these years,
Linux - and a lot of other Open Source Software (OSS) -- has changed the
world. While the concept of Open Source Software has made a significant
difference to the industry, there is another driving force underneath
successful OSS software: its community. While approaching the year 2018
at full speed, at the same time communities has emerged around us. So
before you dive into the depths of the latest and greatest Microsoft
technologies in this issue of XPRT, we'd like to elaborate on the power
of Communities.**

## Emergence of communities

In the early days of both the Greek and Roman empires, it was quite
common for wise men to gather together and share their thoughts. The
entire philosophy of Democracy is based on these gatherings. Therefore,
it's not strange that the word community finds its origin in the Latin
word 'communis', meaning 'shared in common'.

With the growth of IT in the second half of the 20^th^ century,
gatherings found a central place in the IT business. End User Groups
were founded to share experiences, IT Pro's shared their knowledge on
mailing lists, and many developers became active on online forums. Soon
this drew the attention of researchers, which resulted in studies that
correlated community participation to increased productivity.

Xpirit's managing director, Pascal Greuter, used to be a very active
community member: "During my early years as a consultant, I spent my
spare time answering questions on mailing lists. It helped me understand
and take on challenges from different angles. Later, it allowed me to
quickly identify common errors and extract best practices."

[\[Picture Pascal\]]{.mark}

Nowadays, we see communities embedded in both our social and
professional lives. Social networks, WhatsApp groups, Slack, GitHub and
StackOverflow are known to everyone. Community principles became deeply
embedded into project guidelines such as the Agile manifesto. The
low-entry structures of communities with respect for everyone's opinion
are here to stay.

## Technology 'Ecosystems'

Compared to other industries, communities are probably most deeply
embedded in IT. While often gathered around a product or field of
interest in other industries, in IT they are usually related to an area
of expertise. Engineers have the tendency to focus their complete
attention on a single technology. We see this in the structure of the
community. Completely focused "ecosystems" on a single technology allow
deliberate but limited learning, and are difficult to open up to adopt
new ideas.

![](./media/image1.png)


> *"Technologies were clustered into several distinct \"ecosystems\"
> that tended to be used by the same developers. On the left of this
> chart we can see a large cluster representing web development (with
> JavaScript at the center) and one for Microsoft technologies (centered
> around C# and Visual Studio). On the right we see a constellation
> connecting Java, Android, and iOS. Other smaller correlated clusters
> included C/C++/Assembly, Raspberry Pi with Arduino, and languages like
> Python and R alongside language-specific IDEs."*\
> Source: <https://xpir.it/cxprt5-com1>

A good example of such an "ecosystem" is the Open Source .NET Community.
After Microsoft's first source drop of the .NET code late 2014, they
started to develop the platform in close collaboration with the
community. Using open forums, ticketing systems, podcasts, and even open
design sessions, they allowed the community to participate in the
overall design and source code of .NET. The product of the community is
very tangible: Core and derived community components have never been in
better alignment with the design concepts of .NET.

Introducing yourself to such an "ecosystem" can really enrich your
knowledge and can help you gather new ideas. Not only is learning about
the technology a fun experience, but it also increases your
employability! Community engagement is -- like volunteer work - highly
rewarded by potential employers. Stepping outside of your familiar
communities or even your comfort zone can bring about a whole new
experience!

## Community-based Product Development

We already mentioned that .NET and especially .NET Core have benefitted
tremendously from an active community. The community helps to shape new
ideas long before they even get embedded into a released product. This
form of co-creation is helpful because it allows early experiments
before a single byte of production code is produced.

Co-creation hits the heart of the influence of the community on product
development. While the feedback on new ideas flies in almost instantly,
feedback on existing offerings helps product owners set priorities. It
also allows them to identify complicated or misunderstood areas in their
products.

Microsoft, Google, Facebook, and all other tech giants use this form of
co-creation all the time. How many times haven't you tried Gmail Beta or
even an Alpha of ReactJS? These days, Microsoft even issues Go-Live
licenses for Visual Studio and TFS pre-releases. Why? Because the burden
of supporting pre-released software is cheaper than releasing the wrong
thing.

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ![](./media/image3.png)                              |
| \                                       |
| Participate in the community! How? Download Visual Studio Preview     |
| now!                                                                  |
|                                                                       |
| It runs side by side with your other installations.\                  |
| <https://www.visualstudio.com/vs/preview/>                            |
+=======================================================================+
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

## Microsoft â™¥ Communities & OSS

As part of their global strategy, Microsoft has taken a major leap in
embracing Communities and OSS. In the last few years, they have overcome
the historical sentimental gap between themselves and the OSS world. The
most tangible examples of these are highlighted below:

-   SQL Server 2017 will be released on Windows, Linux and Docker

-   Azure Cosmos DB can be used from any NoSQL adapter

-   Bash runs on Windows[^1]

-   Visual Studio is now fully featured on macOS.

![](./media/image5.png)


Microsoft's commitment to the community goes so far that it appears that
all their activity is now on Github. In last year's statistics, they
became the most active OSS contributor! These numbers illustrate that it
is beneficial for a company to not only rely on open source software,
but also contribute to it. Have a look for yourself at
<https://github.com/Microsoft>.

Community features have even been embedded into Microsoft's product
offering. Microsoft Visual Studio Team Services (VSTS), a Microsoft
Azure Cloud-based SAAS offering, enables teams to work closely together
on software development projects while providing a rich tool set and
capabilities that can be used across platforms. This includes a wide
range of topics such as integration with Maven, Jenkins, NPM Package
Management, and many other cross-platform developments. In addition,
advanced pull request workflows and Git forking enables communities
inside companies to leverage the power of the collaboration. While this
is known to many Microsoft developers, it is less known by other
communities. VSTS could easily act as bridge between these communities!

## Rules of Community Engagement

Participating in communities is free of charge but does not come for
free. You can't only take something from the community. Every
participant is expected to make their contribution to the community.
This can be as simple as thanking community members for their efforts in
answering your question. Another way is voting up answers on
StackOverflow. The most important unwritten rule is to pay back
everybody's willingness to help with kindness and respect.

Some communities have strict Contribution Policies. A great example of
this is the .NET Roslyn contribution policy[^2]. It states clearly what
is expected from you when you want to add something to the source code
of the Just-in-Time compilation component of .NET.

You also need to understand that the community gives you a good answer
or an excellent library, but you shouldn't trust it blindly as if it's
your own. Microsoft has recently published a blogpost on their DevOps
blog, explaining that many Open Source projects contain
vulnerabilities[^3]. You'll always need to take any piece of input, use
it to the best, but make it your own and add your own craftsmanship on
top of it.

## Conclusion

Communities deliver an awesome foundation for the modern engineer. They
give you answers, deliver a learning environment, and even building
blocks to accelerate. We at Xpirit try to leverage communities wherever
possible. Every time we use something, we try to give back something.
Feedback, thumbs up, thumbs down, and pull requests on GitHub. The
XPRT-magazine is another example which helps us to combine what we learn
and deliver it back to you.

We encourage you to become a community member. Get active! Don't be shy,
there's plenty of people out there who have made mistakes. And the
community is forgiving. They won't even bother about your mistakes, they
will love it. Because other community members will learn from things you
experience as difficult. Try and share the love! Tweet to us (@xpiritbv)
with your greatest community stories and we'll reward you for the
community love. It will surely enable you to achieve endless
possibilities!

[^1]: <https://xpir.it/xprt5-com2>

[^2]: <https://xpir.it/xprt5-com3>

[^3]: <https://xpir.it/xprt5-com4>
