When looking at the development of a product, there is hardly ever a
lack of ideas and things to do. My own experience is that an average
Product Backlog contains twice the amount of work that will ever be done
on the product. Besides it being a system that contains a lot of waste,
it also creates stress for everybody involved. The Product Owner loses
grip on the Product Backlog, the Development Team(s) feel constant
pressure to deliver more, and stakeholders get frustrated that delivery
times are so long. It's weird that a problem that seems so big can be
easily fixed just by using a two-letter word: "No". However, using "no"
is simple, but not easy! So, how do you do it? Let's explore this by
means of an example.

 

*Meet Peter. Peter is a business analyst in the IT department of Tony.
Their company is active in the automotive industry and they are about to
develop a website to trade second-hand cars. Tony, as a modern
Development Manager, has read all these things about DevOps, Agile and
Scrum, and is adopting some of these theories into the development of
the new website. To implement this the department has had a reshuffle,
resulting in the creation of a new role: The Product Owner. *

* *

*Peter, as a business analyst, has working knowledge of the product, the
ability to transform ideas into concrete actionable work items, and as
such, he seems to fit the role well and he gets selected as Product
Owner. As Peter was already looking for a new challenge, he eagerly
starts in his new role. Tony has written a clear brief for Peter about
what the website should, and should not do, both from a technical and
functional perspective. With this brief Peter starts to break down all
types of Product Backlog items to feed to the Development Team.*

* *

*Whilst cracking away on transforming Tony's list of items, Judy walks
in. Judy is a marketeer and will ensure that the website will be a great
success in the market. Judy also has some requirements for the product,
and she hands Peter a list with more work. Whilst she hands it over,
Peter's phone rings. It's Daniel calling; the Global Head of IT (Tony's
boss). Daniel heard about the shift and the new role for Peter. Besides
wishing him luck in his new role he also stresses that good automation
and a strong build pipeline are the core of success. As Peter thanks
him, and Judy has already walked out, silence surrounds Peter.*

* *

*Peter needs a short moment to catch a breath. What just happened? In
less than 10 minutes multiple people walked by, called, mailed, all with
requirements, wishes, tips, input, and questions. This is messy! How do
I keep track of who I'm talking to? And how do I manage this way too
long list of things to do?! When thinking about this he looks at his
email inbox as an mail from Tony pops up: "Some help along the way!". As
Peter opens the mail, he sees that Tony has arranged for John to join
the team. John is a Product Management consultant hired to help Peter
make his new Product Owner role successful. Things are looking up!*

* *

*Fast forward 2 days -- John has joined the team and John and Peter have
had a chance to get acquainted. In the coming period, John will coach
and mentor Peter in his role as Product Owner. The first thing John
asked is whether Peter already has clarity on all his stakeholders. Who
are you dealing with in this project? Who should you keep satisfied, who
is truly important and who can you put on the back burner? As Peter had
no good answer, John advised creating a stakeholder map.*

 

**STAKEHOLDER MAPPING**

 

A stakeholder map visualizes your stakeholders and their relationship
with you. You divide the stakeholders over 2 axes: The amount of
power/influence someone has, and the stake/interest they have in you and
your product.

![Stakeholdermap to view
stakeholderfield](./media/image1.png)


Influence means: Where are your stakeholders in the hierarchy? Is it a
VP, Senior Manager, CxO? Or perhaps middle management, or somebody from
the operational workforce? But besides hierarchy, some people have
non-hierarchical influence. The type of people who get stuff done
without having a management label. Make sure to plot those as well.

 

Interest/stake means: How high is the stake this particular stakeholder
has in your product? Do they want - or even need - it to be a success?
Also, is the stake from them to you (they want something from you) or
from you to them (you want something from them).

 

Dividing stakeholders like this generates four areas: Keep satisfied,
manage closely, monitor and keep informed. Based on where you have
plotted the stakeholders, a corresponding communication strategy can be
determined. For instance, if you have stakeholders in the keep satisfied
area, it means they have influence but not a major stake. Make sure you
feed these stakeholders the right information at the right times and
they will not become a burden. People who have a major stake but not the
right influence can become very distracting, so keep them informed in
the right way. When creating a communication strategy, think about these
things:

1.    In what quadrant is the stakeholder?

2.    Who is it?

3.    What do they want from me?

4.    What do I want from them?

5.    What is the best communication medium? (how do I interact with
them?)

6.    What is the effect I want to achieve with them?

 

*So, thanks to Johns\' advice, Peter has created a stakeholder map. He
has placed his stakeholders in their corresponding quadrants and is
trying to manage them accordingly. Judy, the marketeer, has been placed
in the Keep Informed section. Although she has a major stake in the
success of the product, Peters feels she lacks the mandate to properly
steer the course of the product. But he keeps receiving urgent requests
from her. Every Sprint review she pushes for new functionalities. Things
like website banners, SEO tags, and she even meddles with the design.
Peter is struggling as he feels he lacks the mandate to push back on
her. When he tried, Judy simply went to the Marketing Manager and
overruled Peter, meaning Peter still had to do it. Peter feels he is
struggling with his mandate. How can I say No if they don't listen? What
can and can't I decide? He decides to take it up with John when they
meet later that week.*

* *

*John recognizes the issue. It's hard to fully grasp your actual mandate
as Product Owner. There are so many different implementations of the
role. From a theoretical perspective you, as Product Owner, are the
mini-CEO of the Product. No one is allowed to overrule you. Peter finds
this hard to believe. Tony and Daniel have already overruled him
multiple times. So how do you deal with this?*

* *

**PRODUCT OWNER MATURITY**

 

Product Owners come in many shapes and sizes. Not every Product Owner
has the mandate to make all the decisions for the product. As such,
there is a tool to help understand how the various types of Product
Owners work, and what their respective pros and cons are. It's referred
to as Product Owner Maturity.

![A screenshot of a cell phone Description automatically
generated](./media/image2.png)


On the vertical axis, you have the level of added value/expected
benefits from a Product Owner, which is determined by the horizontal
axis, the type of Product Owner. The higher the maturity of the Product
Owner, the more benefits you will reap from the role. We see that low
maturity Product Owners are often on the receiving end of work, they get
told what to do, whereas more mature Product Owners are on the
initiating side. They make things happen and kick-start ideas. So, the
more to the right you are, the more mandate you have.

 

The tool categorizes 5 types of Product Owners, from Scribe to
Entrepreneur. A Scribe is the most basic implementation of a Product
Owner. The Scribe receives a list of work to do and hands it to the
Development Team. Look at it like a homing pigeon. The Proxy is already
more mature, making some decisions for the product. However, when the
Development Team has a critical question or request, the Proxy does need
to check with his manager, the team lead, a head of product or such to
get approval or validate the question. Then, on the initiating side, the
Business Representative is somebody who not only understands the
technical domain of the product, but can also be a true representative
of the business. Understanding how the business context works. The
Sponsor is a Product Owner type who also has the budget to make
decisions for the direction of the product, and lastly, there is the
Entrepreneur, who has a full and total mandate over the product, its
direction, the vision and strategy, and no one will overrule their
decisions.

 

When using this tool, you should ask yourself two questions:

1.    Where would you place yourself? What type of Product Owner are you
and what is given to you by the organization? And then even much more
important:

2.    How do you act? How are you behaving?

 

Do you behave as a Scribe or Proxy, or do you take full ownership of
your product and act as the products' entrepreneur? This is the very
basis of powerful Product Ownership. If you reside in the fact you are
only a Scribe, and thus act that way, you will never be seen as more
than that. However, if you act as the mini-CEO of the product, people
will recognize that and behave accordingly. So, what does that mean?
What can and/or should you do? Here are some things to think about that
can help increase your mandate:

·      Do you have a clear Product Vision?

·      Are you capable of explaining the strategic direction of the
product?

·      What are the total costs of ownership of the product?

·      What are your key value indicators to know you are maximizing the
value?

·      How pro-actively are you managing your stakeholder map and
engaging with the most important stakeholders?

·      How often do you place yourself out there talking about your
product, the ideas that you have and how it should progress?

·      When something goes wrong, who do you blame? What could you have
done differently?

·      How often do you say No? And how often do you use the right no at
the right time?

 

*The last question triggered Peter. As he has his stakeholder map, he is
improving his communication strategy towards the stakeholders, but he
recognizes he is struggling with saying no. Too often he just agrees on
what is being said as it all makes pretty good sense. That isn't helping
his mandate. Actually, by looking at it closer, the more you say no, the
more you create your mandate. But, then again, you can't just go around
and say no to everybody all the time. Man, this is hard!*

* *

*John comes around once more. Saying no - once you understand your
mandate and stakeholder field - is not that hard. There are five steps
to follow when you get a request from a stakeholder. Then, there are
multiple versions of no, depending on the type of question and type of
stakeholder.*

 

**SAYING NO**

 

The five steps to get to a no:

1.    Who? Who are you talking to, which stakeholder?

2.    What? What is the question of the stakeholder? What are they
asking? Do you properly understand it?

3.    Intention. What is your intention; saying yes, no, or later/maybe?

4.    Say no. Formulate the right type of no.

5.    Listen. Did the receiving party understand and agree? Is that
matter done now?

 

As point 4 describes, there are various ways to formulate a no. One way
to think about it is by categories. Selling no can be done by looking at
the question from various perspectives. For instance, from a perspective
of value for the user. Or from a perspective of product quality. Or from
a budget or timing perspective. Looking at it this way, when a
stakeholder asks for a feature, you can think about the timing, what it
will cost, what the impact on quality will be. Based on the type of
stakeholder (what you thought about in the first step) you will
recognize that certain perspectives work better for certain
stakeholders. Talking about the financial impact of a feature request
will work well with stakeholders who are also concerned with the costs
and revenues of the product.

 

*So, Peter takes another look at his stakeholder map, and he takes
another look at where he plotted himself on the maturity overview. He
starts to understand that Tony and Daniel are more concerned about the
technical quality, and somebody like Judy - as marketeer - is perhaps
more concerned about the users and product value. Now, when they ask for
new features, the no for Tony and Daniel can be from a perspective of
product quality (i.e. It sounds like a great feature, but the technical
implications would be so big that a change to the core architecture
would be needed and that is not possible right now). The no for Judy can
be around users (i.e. I don't have enough data to be sure the entire
user base would benefit from this, so I would need more proof and/or
insights before I can pick this up). This way the stakeholders might
better understand why sometimes he would say no. Saying no helps with
keeping the focus on the right things and enables Peter to deliver value
better and quicker.*

 

When looking at the development of a product, there is hardly ever a
lack of ideas and things to do. We need to say no much more often.
Having more focus on the things that matter and make a difference.
Saying no is more than just starting to say no out of the blue and to
everyone and everything. You need to understand your stakeholder field.
Who are you dealing with? Where are they in the organization or your
surroundings? In addition, you need to understand your mandate. Can I
just use a blunt no, or should there be more context? Should I let the
stakeholder choose between options? How do I best formulate the no?

 

Once you get a hold of your stakeholder field and your mandate, saying
no can become second nature, enabling you to steer on true value
maximization. Good luck!

 

 

 

**Editors note to XPIRIT:** Not sure if this is needed, or in what way
the reference to the book will be made, but this could be used (feel
free to skip):

 

Would you like to learn and read more?

This article is based on the content of the book "50 Tinten Nee" written
by Robbin Schuurman and myself; Willem Vermaak. At the moment it is only
is available in Dutch. Translations are upcoming!

I'm also online, so feel free to reach out!
