# ­­The Xpirit Learning Experience -- Beyond individual learning

In this constantly changing world full of new technology and tools,
training is an important investment for companies and individuals. To
stay up to date, and thus relevant, following training is essential. But
which training is the right choice? Because there is only so much
budget, and training is expensive.

In many cases, video training is a great alternative. Platforms such as
Pluralsight, LinkedIn Learning or EdX provide many courses at very
reasonable prices. This training is great for gaining knowledge on a
certain topic. However, it is rarely targeted at you, or the challenges
you and your team face on a day-to-day basis.

Furthermore, these types of training are targeted at the individual.
Many companies are moving towards a DevOps Way of working and want to
train their teams as a whole. Usually the way to try to accomplish this
is to let all members of the team follow the same video training. While
this improves the individual skills, it does not improve the team
skills. We found we had to cover some ground on this level as well, and
came up with the Xpirit Learning Experience.

In this article we will explain what we have learned as well as the
journey towards this Learning Experience. How it started with the
organization of a worldwide event that led to local spinoffs and
eventually to a learning experience.

## Global DevOps Bootcamp as an ignition for the Xpirit Learning Experience

In 2017 we, Xpirit (together with Solidify), organized the first Global
DevOps Bootcamp. The Global DevOps Bootcamp (GDBC) is a global event,
targeted at people who want to learn about DevOps. People joined a local
venue at 25 locations worldwide to participate in the bootcamp. Because
we wanted to ensure everybody had the same learning experience, we
created an event out of the box. This means we provided keynotes on
video, development machines provisioned in the cloud, all the necessary
infrastructure, lunch and content in the form of challenges.

Instead of letting people do these challenges alone, the first thing we
asked participants to do was to create teams. Together they could
compete against their local competitors (other teams) and their global
competitors (people in other venues), by providing some simple game
mechanics and a scoreboard.

This was a huge success, and 3 years later, in 2019, we organized the
third edition of GDBC, with 10,000 participants and 95 local venues. A
lot has changed in terms of size and organization, but the concept still
remains. We provide an event out of the box, where teams compete to
complete challenges.

One of the great feedback items we received in 2019 was the cooperation
between people with different backgrounds and the low threshold to get
started. Since they had to work together, the team could be made up of
different skills and maturity levels. This meant that we had a mix of
developers, engineers, people who had never used the Azure Portal, never
seen Azure DevOps or who came from a different cloud provider to see how
things work in a DevOps setting. We even had scrum masters joining us to
help out the various groups!

### Lessons learned

With GDBC we learned a number of things. We used that information to
make the edition of the following year even better and applied these
lessons learned in the Xpirit Learning Experience.

**People do not work together automatically**

When you put five different people in a team and give them each a user
account, they start working alone. To overcome this, we provided the
team one user account, so they are more inclined to work together. They
still have an option to research things on their own or in pairs (highly
encouraged), but to act with that information they need to use the
shared account. This enables the team members to work as an actual team,
where they need to communicate about the directions to the solutions
they are taking.

**Without a why, people do not get it**

In the first year we made the basic mistake of not providing a good
storyline. The challenges the teams needed to complete were great, but
the rationale was missing. So the logical question arose, why is this
relevant? Why should I learn this? In the latest edition we changed
this. We used a virtual company, PartsUnlimited, and built a storyline.
This virtual company wants to move to the cloud to fight the
continuously increasing competition. Of course, this comes with a set of
common, as well as not so common challenges. These challenges are based
on what we see in the field at our customers. These real-life examples
and proposed solutions made great material for the story of
PartsUnlimited. By creating a storyline, supported by videos with some
sketches, people gained a better understanding of the rationale. By
steering the choices towards a technology, without providing all the
answers, teams were more inclined to research and find solutions.

**Step-by-step Instructions have a reverse effect**

Of course, it is great to follow a step-by-step instruction to complete
a certain task or challenge, but the question is: Do people learn enough
by following detailed instructions? Our experience is that true learning
does not happen by following an instruction. You only learn by finding
the solution yourself. In GDBC we provide the teams with guidance and
links, so they can find the solution. Only after trying themselves, the
proctor can decide to give them a step-by-step solution. For GDBC we
created videos that show a recording of these step-by-step approaches.
We saw that this made a huge difference in the behavior of the teams.

**Don't punish** **requests** **for help**

Everybody likes a bit of competition. Because of the nature of the
Global DevOps Bootcamp, we created a Global scoreboard where teams could
see their ranking compared to other teams all over the world. This
brought out the best in some teams, but we also saw the opposite. Teams
were afraid of asking for help, because that would cost them valuable
points. Since the event is about learning and not about being the best,
we made sure teams were not punished for requesting help, but instead
were motivated to do so. By changing the mechanics of the scoreboard we
made this happen. For example, instead of deducting points when asking
for help, we gave points when a challenge was successfully completed.

**The Platform**

While the first edition of the Global DevOps Bootcamp was still very
manual, the last edition was a complete self-service experience. People
received a user account, a custom-made website with the challenges and
they were guided through the storyline. The platform behind this
experience takes care of starting and stopping challenges, causing
disruptions or rolling out fixes and doing validation. This platform
became the foundation of the Xpirit Learning Experience.

## The Xpirit Learning Experience

After the last edition of GDBC we evaluated all our learning experiences
and feedback, and found that this way of learning, learning by
experience, is a great way to quickly get up to speed with new
technology. We started to refine our back-end platform a bit more and
created the Local DevOps Bootcamp. This event is a replica of the Global
DevOps Bootcamp. The only difference is that it is not a globally but a
locally organized event. For example, to train some teams at one of our
customers. Again, this worked out really well, and it was time to take
it even one step further.

When one of our customers, Maersk, asked us to train their development
teams for their cloud transition, this was the perfect opportunity to
take this next step. Many of the people already followed some individual
training, but, as we saw earlier, this training did not cover all
Maersk-specific topics. The teams needed to start working in a
Maersk-specific context, using the knowledge they gained through the
individual training courses. This is how the Xpirit Learning Experience
came to life.

The Xpirit Learning Experience follows the same principles as the Global
DevOps Bootcamp

-   Learn as a team, and not as an individual

-   Learn by doing, without the hassle of setting up all pre-requisites

-   Guide people through a storyline that explains the why

-   Make it a full self-service experience

-   Make it fun and engaging by using different formats throughout the
    day.

## The Experience

To make it a bit more tangible, let's use the Maersk implementation as
an example and show what the Xpirit Learning Experience can offer,
regardless of the content.

### Agenda

Let's start by explaining the agenda:

-   **Global Keynotes**

To set the context and inspire participants, we start the day with a
recorded Global Keynote. We have many great speakers within Xpirit and
have splendid connections throughout the field. To cover the relevant
topics for the learning experience, we make sure to select a speaker
that is a subject matter expert on these topics. A recorded keynote
makes it easier to arrange schedules and logistics, but also allows the
event to be fully virtual.

-   **Local Keynote**

In the local keynote, the organizational context can be further
expanded. Why are people in the room, what is the vision of the company
and what does the company expect to get out of this? It also is an
introduction to the challenges ahead.

-   **Divide in Teams**

After the keynotes it is time to divide into different groups. People
can be physically together in a room, or use a virtual channel to work
together. In the case of Maersk we used Microsoft Teams to put people
together in a Teams channel.

-   **Work on challenges**

When teams start working on the challenges, they should be able to do so
in a self-service mode. The proctor at hand provides them with the URL
of the challenges website and the credentials to log in. This enables
the people to do everything themselves. They can look at the video
content that guides them through the storyline. They can start
challenges, they can automatically validate challenges and they can even
fix challenges by pressing a button. Each challenge has a step-by-step
instruction video attached, which they can use when they get stuck. The
Learning Experience platform takes care of this by guiding them through
the different challenges and allowing them to follow the storyline.

-   **Learning Review**

When a team completes a challenge, this is always followed by a Learning
Review. This will help the team to reflect and it prepares them for the
next challenges. In many cases we ask the team to fill in a short form
that answers a few simple questions. What have you learned, what would
you do differently, what would you do if this would happen?

-   **Share experience**

After a set amount of time, we bring back the people and let them share
their experiences by using the learning review. After that, they can
start working on the next challenge.

### Completing Challenges

Now that we have seen what concepts of the Learning Experience, let's
walk through a number of screens to give an impression of how this
looks.

![](./media/image1.png)


After a team has received the URL and their credentials, they can log in
to a custom-made challenges portal. From here they can go through the
various modules. A module is a chapter of our story in which we cover a
specific topic, for instance Cloud, Infrastructure as Code or Git. The
Module describes the rationale, the storyline, and always starts with a
funny sketch that sets the scene.

![](./media/image2.png)


Each module consists of multiple challenges. The challenges serve as
different chapters in a module. Challenges are created in such a way
that the team accumulates knowledge from the start. Instead of asking
people to create a solution for the end state, we let them experience
why the end state is needed. Let's explain this by means of an example.
Many companies use a self-service portal to provision cloud resources. A
logical choice is to educate people on using the self-service portal.
However, that will not explain them WHY the self-service portal is
needed. By letting them walk the line, they come to realize the
rationale. In this case, people do not have rights to execute scripts on
production. So, a portal that automates this for them is useful.

![](./media/image3.png)


Within a challenge, the team needs to complete certain tasks to
successfully finish that challenge. The tasks describe a specific
problem that the team needs to overcome. The "Links & Information"
section contains all necessary resources the team needs to fix the
challenge. When all tasks have been completed, the team can hit the
\[Validate Challenge\] button. This is where the platform kicks in
again. The backend validates whether all tasks have been completed
successfully and gives direct feedback to the team.

When a team is not able to complete the challenge, they can watch the
step-by-step video that guides them through the process. When this is
also not sufficient, the proctor can enable the \[Fix Challenge\]
button. This rolls out fixes to their environment, so they look at a
solution.

Step-by-step

![](./media/image4.png)
After that the team can fill in the
Learning Review and prepare for the next challenge.

## Available content

The Learning Experience can be set up with any custom modules and
challenges needed for your organization. We currently have modules
available for:

-   Azure Fundamentals

-   Azure Automation with ARM Templates and Terraform

-   Git Fundamentals

-   Observability and Monitoring

-   Azure DevOps with repositories, work items, pipelines and artefacts

-   Site Reliability Engineering

Every module starts with the fundamentals and builds up to more advance
topics. Of course, it is all set up to learn things by doing them.

## The platform

To make all this work, the platform that we created is quite extensive
as it can accommodate a global event like GDBC with 10,000 people. To
give you a brief insight, we will go over the main elements of the
platform.

![](./media/image5.png)


On the right you can see the items we provision for each team: a fully
functioning DevOps environment that produces a working web shop running
on Azure, with an App Service Front End and an Azure SQL database for
storing the data. In Azure DevOps a team project will be generated that
has the source code for the application as well as the CI/CD pipeline.
They even get their own Azure Artifact Feed and service connections to
Azure and Snyk Security Tooling, so they have the same environment as
they would have in a real enterprise environment.

The left-hand part of the diagram shows the elements that provide the
platform that is used. The attendees can log in to the Challenges
Website and see their teams information, read the backstory on why they
need to do something, and all the documentation and video training they
need. They can start, stop, validate a challenge and we even give the
proctors the option to fix their environment in case they get stuck. For
example: when they trigger a challenge to start, the challenges website
puts a message on the service bus. The control plane will pick up this
and schedule a pod with the necessary docker containers and settings it
needs to act inside the team's environment.

Using Docker gives us the flexibility to use any development stack to
act in the environment and makes sure we can operate independently from
other challenges and teams for example.

## Conclusion

The Xpirit Learning Experience is targeted at teams that want to learn
as a team. The content can be fully customized and targeted at you and
your organization. Because it is fully self-service and uses video to
guide teams through a storyline, the training can be followed by small
and large groups, and can easily be run multiple times. This decreases
the training costs per person dramatically. People who followed GDBC or
one of the other Learning Experiences are very enthusiastic about it. It
teaches them something by doing it, without the hassle of setting things
up on a real live platform, with real life scenarios.

If you want to experience it yourself, feel free to reach out!
